FO-SHO-HING-TSAN-KING. A METRICAL VERSION OF THE LIFE OF BUDDHA BY MA-MENG-PU-SA. (ASVAGHOSHA BODHISATTVA.)
----------
KIOUEN I. VARGA 1. THE BIRTH.
----------
1. (There was) a descendant of the Ikshvâku (family), an invincible Sâkya monarch, pure in mind (mental gifts) and of unspotted virtue, called therefore ’Pure-rice’ (Suddhodana).
2. Joyously reverenced by all men (or, ’beings’), as the new moon (is welcomed by the world), the king indeed (was) like the heaven-ruler Sakra, his queen like (the divine) Sakî.
3. Strong and calm of purpose as the earth, pure in mind as the water-lily, her name, figuratively assumed, Mâyâ, she was in truth incapable of class-comparison.
4. On her in likeness as the heavenly queen descended the spirit and entered her womb. A mother, but free from grief or pain, (she was) without any false or illusory mind.
----------
5. Disliking the clamorous ways of the world, (she remembered) the excellent garden of Lumbinî, a pleasant spot, a quiet forest retreat, (with its) trickling fountains, and blooming flowers and fruits.
6. Quiet and peaceful, delighting in meditation, respectfully she asked the king for liberty to roam therein; the king, understanding her earnest desire, was seized with a seldom-felt anxiety (to grant her request).
7. He commanded his kinsfolk, within and without (the palace), to repair with her to that garden shade; and now the queen Mâyâ knew that her time for child-bearing was come. 8. She rested calmly on a beautiful couch, (surrounded by) a hundred thousand female attendants;
(it was) the eighth day of the fourth moon, a season of serene and agreeable character. 9. Whilst she (thus) religiously observed the rules of a pure discipline, Bodhisattva was born from her right side, (come) to deliver the world, constrained by great pity, without causing his mother pain or anguish.
----------
----------
----------
10. As king Yu-liu was born from the thigh, as king Pi-t’au was born from the hand, as king Man-to was born from the top of the head, as king Kia-k’ha was born from the arm-pit, 11. So also was Bodhisattva on the day of his birth produced from the right side; gradually emerging from the womb, he shed in every direction the rays of his glory.
12. As one (born) from recumbent space, and not through the gates of life, through countless kalpas, practising virtue, self-conscious he came forth to life, without confusion.
13. Calm and collected, not falling headlong (was he born), gloriously manifested, perfectly adorned, sparkling with light he came from the womb, as when the sun first rises (from the East). 14. (Men) indeed regarded his exceeding great glory, yet their sight remained uninjured: he allowed them to gaze, the brightness of his person concealed for the time, as when we look upon the moon in the heavens.
15. His body, nevertheless, was effulgent with light, and like the sun which eclipses the shining of the lamp, so the true gold-like beauty of Bodhisattva shone forth and was diffused everywhere.
16. Upright and firm and unconfused in mind, he deliberately took seven steps, the soles of his feet resting evenly upon the ground as he went, his footmarks remained bright as seven stars.
17. Moving like the lion, king of beasts, and looking earnestly towards; the four quarters, penetrating to the centre the principles of truth, he spake thus with the fullest assurance: 18. ’This birth is in the condition of a Buddha; after this I have done with renewed birth; now only am I born this once, for the purpose of saving all the world.’
19. And now from the midst of heaven there descended two streams of pure water, one warm, the other cold, and baptized his head, causing refreshment to his body.
20. And now he is placed in the precious palace hall, a jewelled couch for him to sleep upon, and the heavenly kings with their golden flowery hands hold fast the four feet of the bed.
21. Meanwhile the Devas in space, seizing their jewelled canopies, attending, raise in responsive harmony their heavenly songs, to encourage him to accomplish his perfect purpose.
22. Then the Nâga-râgas filled with joy, earnestly desiring to show their reverence for the most excellent law, as they had paid honour to the former Buddhas, now went to meet Bodhisattva; 23. They scattered before him Mandâra flowers, rejoicing with heartfelt joy to pay such religious homage; (and so, again,) Tathâgata having appeared in the world, the Suddha angels rejoiced with gladness;
24. With no selfish or partial joy, but for the sake of religion they rejoiced, because creation, engulfed in the ocean of pain, was now to obtain perfect release.
25. Then the precious Mountain-râga, Sume(ru), firmly holding this great earth when Bodhisattva appeared in the world, was swayed by the wind of his perfected merit.
26. On every hand the world was greatly shaken, as the wind drives the tossing boat; so also the minutest atoms of sandal perfume, and the hidden sweetness of precious lilies,
27. Floated on the air and rose through space and then commingling came back to earth; so again the garments of Devas descending from heaven touching the body, caused delightful thrills of joy;
28. The sun and moon with constant course redoubled the brilliancy of their light, whilst in the world the fire’s gleam of itself prevailed without the use of fuel.
29. Pure water, cool and refreshing from the springs, flowed here-and there, self-caused; in the palace all the waiting women were filled with joy at such an unprecedented event.
30. Proceeding all in company, they drink and bathe themselves; in all arose calm and delightful thoughts; countless inferior Devas (bhûtas), delighting in religion, like clouds assembled. 31. In the garden of Lumbinî, filling the spaces between the trees,
rare and special flowers, in great abundance, bloomed out of season. 32. All cruel and malevolent kinds of beings, together conceived a loving heart; all diseases and afflictions among men without a cure applied, of themselves were healed.
33. The various cries and confused sounds of beasts were hushed and silence reigned; the stagnant water of the river-courses flowed apace, whilst the polluted streams became clear and pure. 34. No clouds gathered throughout the heavens, whilst angelic music, self-caused, was heard around; the whole world of sentient creatures enjoyed peace and universal tranquillity.
35. Just as when a country visited by desolation, suddenly obtains .an enlightened ruler, so when Bodhisattva was born, he came to remove the sorrows of all living things.
36. Mâra, the heavenly monarch, alone was grieved and rejoiced not. The Royal Father (Suddhodana) beholding his son, strange and miraculous, as to his birth, 37. Though self-possessed and assured in his soul, was yet moved with astonishment and his countenance changed,
whilst he alternately weighed with himself the meaning (of such an event), now rejoiced and now distressed. 38. The queen-mother beholding her child, born thus contrary to laws of nature, her timorous woman’s heart was doubtful; her mind through fear, swayed between extremes:
39. Not distinguishing the happy from the sad portents, again and again she gave way to grief; and now the aged women of the world, (of the ’long night’) in a confused way supplicating heavenly guidance,
40. Implored the gods to whom their rites were paid, to bless the child; (cause peace to rest upon the royal child.) Now there was at this time in the grove, a certain soothsayer, a Brahman, 41. Of dignified mien and wide-spread renown, famed for his skill and scholarship: beholding the signs, his heart rejoiced, and he exulted at the miraculous event. 42. Knowing the king’s mind to be somewhat perplexed, he addressed him (thus) with truth and earnestness, ’Men born in the world, chiefly desire to have a son the most renowned;
43. ’But now the king, like the moon when full, should feel in himself a perfect joy, having begotten an unequalled son, (for by this the king) will become illustrious among his race;
44. ’Let then his heart be joyful and glad, banish all anxiety and doubt, the spiritual omens that are everywhere, manifested indicate for your house and dominion a course of continued prosperity.
45. ’The most excellently endowed child now born will bring deliverance to the entire world, none but a heavenly teacher has a body such as this, golden colour’d, gloriously resplendent. 46. ’One endowed with such transcendent marks, must reach the state of "Samyak-Sambodhi,"
or if he be induced to engage in worldly delights, then he must become a universal monarch. 47. ’Everywhere recognised as the ruler of the great earth, mighty in his righteous government, as a monarch ruling the four empires, uniting under his sway all other rulers;
48. ’As among all lesser lights, the sun’s brightness is by far the most excellent. But if he seek a dwelling among the mountain forests, with single heart searching for deliverance,
49. ’Having arrived at the perfection of true wisdom, he will become illustrious throughout the world; for as mount Sumeru is monarch among all mountains,
50. ’Or, as gold is chief among all precious things, or, as the ocean is supreme among all streams, or, as the moon is first among the stars, or, as the sun is brightest of all luminaries, 51. ’So Tathâgata, born in the world, is the most eminent of men; his eyes clear and expanding, the lashes both above and below moving with the lid, 52. ’The iris of the eye of a clear blue colour. in shape like the moon when half full,
such characteristics as these, without contradiction, foreshadow the most excellent condition of perfect (wisdom).’ 53. At this time the king addressed the twice-born, ’If it be as you say, with respect to these miraculous signs, that they indicate such consequences, 54. ’Then no such case has happened with former kings, nor down to our time has such a thing occurred.’ The Brahman addressed the king thus,
’Say not so; for it is not right; 55. ’For with regard to renown and wisdom, personal celebrity, and worldly substance, these four things indeed are not to be considered according to precedent or subsequence; 56. ’But whatever is produced according to nature, such things are liable to the law of cause and effect: but now whilst I recount some parallels let the king attentively listen;
57. ’Bhrigu, Aṅgira (Aṅgiras?), these two of Rishi family, having passed many years apart from men, each begat an excellently-endowed son, 58. ’Brihaspati with Sukra, skilful in making royal treatises, not derived from former families (or, tribes);
59. ’Sârasvata, the Rishi, whose works have long disappeared, begat a son, Po-lo-sa, who compiled illustrious Sutras and Shâstras; 60. ’That which now we know and see, is not therefore dependent on previous connection; Vyâsa, the Rishi, the author of numerous treatises,
61. ’After his death had among his descendants, Poh-mi (Vâlmîki), who extensively collected Gâthâ sections; Atri, the Rishi, not understanding the sectional treatise on medicine,
62. ’Afterwards begat Âtreya, who was able to control diseases; the twice-born Rishi Kusi (Kusika), not occupied with heretical treatises,
63. ’Afterwards (begat) Kia-ti-na râga, who thoroughly understood heretical systems; the sugar-cane monarch, who began his line, could not restrain the tide of the sea,
64. ’But Sagara-râga, his descendant, who begat a thousand royal sons, he could control the tide of the great sea so that it should come no further. 65. ’Ganaka, the Rishi, without a teacher acquired power of abstraction. All these, who obtained such renown, acquired powers of themselves; 66. ’Those distinguished before, were afterwards forgotten; those before forgotten, became afterwards distinguished; kings like these and godlike Rishis have no need of family inheritance, 67. ’And therefore the world need not regard those going before or following. So, mighty king! is it with you, you should experience true joy of heart, 68. ’And because of this joy should banish for ever doubt or anxiety.’
The king hearing the words of the seer was glad, and offered him increased gifts. 69. ’Now have I begotten a valiant (excellent) son (he said), who will establish a wheel authority,
whilst I, when old and grey-headed, will go forth to lead a hermit’s life, 70. ’So that my holy king-like son may not give up the world and wander through mountain forests.’
And now near the spot within the garden, there was a Rishi, leading the life of an ascetic; 71. His name was Asita, wonderfully skilful in the interpretation of signs;
No Chinese
he approached the gate of the palace; the king (beholding him) exclaimed, ’This is none other but Brahmadeva, 72. ’Himself enduring penance from love of true religion, these two characteristics so plainly visible as marks of his austerities.’
Then the king was much rejoiced; 73. And forthwith he invited him within the palace, and with reverence set before him entertainment, whilst he, entering the inner palace, rejoiced only (in prospect of) seeing the royal child. 74. Although surrounded by the crowd of court-ladies, yet still he was as if in desert solitude; and now they place a preaching throne and pay him increased honour and religious reverence, 75. As Antideva râga reverenced the priest Vasishtha.
Then the king addressing the Rishi, said, ’Most fortunate am I, 76. ’Great Rishi! that you have condescended to come here to receive from me becoming gifts and reverence; I pray you therefore enter on your exhortation.’
77. Thus requested and invited the Rishi felt unutterable joy, and said, ’All hail, ever victorious monarch! possessed of all noble (virtuous) qualities,
78. ’Loving to meet the desires of those who seek, nobly generous in honouring the true law, conspicuous as a race for wisdom and humanity, with humble mind you pay me homage, as you are bound.
79. ’Because of your righteous deeds in former lives, now are manifested these excellent fruits; listen to me, then, whilst I declare the reason of the present meeting.
80. ’As I was coming on the sun’s way, I heard the Devas in space declare that the king had born to him (begotten) a royal son, who would arrive at perfect intelligence;
81. ’Moreover I beheld such other portents, as have constrained me now to seek your presence; desiring to see the Sâkya monarch who will erect the standard of the true law.’
82. The king hearing the Rishi’s. words was fully assured; escaping from the net of doubt, he ordered an attendant to bring the prince, to exhibit him to the Rishi.
83. The Rishi, beholding the prince, the thousand-rayed wheel on the soles of his feet, the web-like filament between his fingers, between his eyebrows the white wool-like prominence, 84. His privy parts hidden as those of the horse, his complexion bright and lustrous; seeing these wonderful birth-portents, the seer wept and sighed deeply.
85. The king beholding the tears of the Rishi, thinking of his son, his soul was overcome, and his breath fast held his swelling heart. Thus alarmed and ill at ease,
86. Unconsciously he arose from his seat, and, bowing his head at the Rishi’s feet he addressed him in these words, ’This son of mine, born thus wonderfully,
87. ’Beautiful in face, and surpassingly graceful, little different from the gods in form, giving promise of superiority in the world, ah! why has he caused thee grief and pain?
88. ’Forbid it, that my son should die! (should be short-lived!)--(the thought) creates in me grief and anxiety; that one athirst, within reach of the eternal draught, should after all reject and lose it! sad indeed!
89. ’Forbid it, he should lose his wealth and treasure! dead to his house! lost to his country! for he who has a prosperous son in life, gives pledge that his country’s weal is well secured; 90. ’And then, coming to die, my heart will rest content, rejoicing in the thought. of offspring surviving me; even as a man possessed of two eyes, one of which keeps watch, while the other sleeps;
91. ’Not like the frost-flower of autumn, which though it seems to bloom, is not a reality. A man who, midst his tribe and kindred, deeply loves a spotless son, 92. ’At every proper time in recollection of it has joy; O! that you would cause me to revive!’
The Rishi, knowing the king-sire to be thus greatly afflicted at heart, 93. Immediately addressed the Maharâga: ’Let not the king be for a moment anxious! the words I have spoken to the king, let him ponder these, and not permit himself to doubt; 94. ’The portents now are as they were before, cherish then no other thoughts! But recollecting I myself am old, on that account I could not hold my tears;
95. ’For now my end is coming on. But this son of thine will rule the world, born for the sake of all that lives! this is indeed one difficult to meet with;
96. ’He shall give up his royal estate, escape from the domain of the five desires , with resolution and with diligence practise austerities, and then awakening, grasp the truth.
97. ’Then constantly, for the world’s sake (all living things), destroying the impediments of ignorance and darkness, he shall give to all enduring light, the brightness of the sun of perfect wisdom.
98. ’All flesh submerged in the sea of sorrow; all diseases collected as the bubbling froth; decay and age like the wild billows; death like the engulfing ocean; 99. ’Embarking lightly in the boat of wisdom he will save the world from all these perils,
by wisdom stemming back the flood. His, pure teaching like to the neighbouring shore, 100. ’The power of meditation, like a cool lake, will be enough for all the unexpected birds;
thus deep and full and wide is the great river of the true law; 101. ’All creatures parched by the drought of lust may freely drink thereof, without stint;
those enchained in the domain of the five desires, those driven along by many sorrows, 102. ’And deceived amid the wilderness of birth and death, in ignorance of the way of escape, for these Bodhisattva has been born in the world, to open out a way of salvation.
103. ’The fire of lust and covetousness, burning with the fuel of the objects of sense, (on the flames) he has caused the cloud of his mercy to rise, so that the rain of the law may extinguish them. 104. ’The heavy gates of gloomy unbelief, fast kept by covetousness and lust, within which are confined all living things, he opens and gives free deliverance. 105. ’With the tweezers of his diamond wisdom he plucks out the opposing principles of lustful desire. In the self-twined meshes of folly and ignorance all flesh poor and in misery, helplessly (lying), 106. ’The king of the law has come forth, to rescue these from bondage.
Let not the king in respect of this his son encourage in himself one thought of doubt or pain; 107. ’But rather let him grieve on account of the world, led captive by desire, opposed to truth;
but I, indeed, amid the ruins of old age and death, am far removed from the meritorious condition of the holy one, 108. ’Possessed indeed of powers of abstraction, yet not within reach of the gain he will give, to be derived from his teaching as the Bodhisattva; not permitted to hear his righteous law, 109. ’My body worn out, after death, alas! (destined) to be born as a Deva still liable to the three calamities (old age, decay, and death), (therefore I weep).’
The king and all his household attendants, hearing the words of the Rishi, 110. Knowing the cause of his regretful sorrow, banished from their minds all further anxiety:
’And now (the king. said) to have begotten this excellent son, gives me rest at heart; 111. ’But that he should leave his kingdom and home, and practise the life of an ascetic, not anxious to ensure the stability of the kingdom, the thought of this still brings with it pain.’
112. At this time the Rishi, turning to the king with true words, said, ’It must be even as the king anticipates, he will surely arrive at perfect enlightenment.’
113. Thus having appeased every anxious heart among the king’s household, (the Rishi) by his own inherent spiritual power ascended into space and disappeared.
114. At this time Suddhodana râga, seeing the excellent marks (predictive signs) of his son, and, moreover, hearing the words of Asita, certifying that which would surely happen, 115. Was greatly affected with reverence to the child, he redoubled measures for its protection, and (was filled) with constant thought; (moreover) he issued decrees through the empire, to liberate all captives in prison. 116. According to the custom when a (royal) son was born, giving the usual largess, in agreement with the directions of the Sacred Books, and extending his gifts to all; (or, all these things he did completely).
117. The child when ten days old, (his father’s) mind being now quite tranquil, he announced a sacrifice to all the gods, and prepared to give liberal offerings to all the religious bodies;
118. Srâmanas and Brâhmanas invoked by their prayers a blessing from the gods, whilst he bestowed gifts on the royal kinspeople and the ministers and the poor within the country; 119. The women who dwelt in the city or the villages, (all those who needed) cattle or horses or elephants or money, each, according to his necessities, was liberally supplied;
120. Then selecting by divination a lucky time, they took the child back to his own palace; with a double-feeding white-pure-tooth, carried in a richly-adorned chariot (cradle), 121. With ornaments of every kind and colour round his neck; shining with beauty, exceedingly resplendent with unguents.
The queen embracing him in her arms, going around, worshipped the heavenly spirits. 122. Afterwards she remounted her precious chariot, surrounded by her waiting women;
the king, with his ministers and people, and all the crowd of attendants, leading the way and following, 123. Even as the ruler of heaven, Sakra, is surrounded by crowds of Devas;
as Mahesvara, when suddenly his six-faced child was born, 124. Arranging every kind of present, gave gifts, and asked for blessings; so now the king, when his royal son was born, made all his arrangements in like manner;
125. So Vaisravana, the heavenly king, when Nalakûvara was born, surrounded by a concourse of Devas, was filled with joy and much gladness; 126. So the king, now the royal prince was born, in the kingdom of Kapila, his people and all his subjects were likewise filled with joy.
----------
VARGA 2. LIVING IN THE PALACE.
127. And now in the household of Suddhodana râga, because of the birth of the royal prince, his clansmen and younger brethren (namesakes), with his ministers, were all generously disposed,
128. Whilst elephants, horses and chariots and the wealth of the country and precious vessels, daily increased and abounded, being produced wherever requisite;
129. So too countless hidden treasures came of themselves from the earth. From the midst of the pure snowy mountains, a wild herd of white elephants, 130. Without noise, of themselves, came; not curbed by any, self-subdued,
every kind of colour’d horse, in shape and quality surpassingly excellent, 131. With sparkling jewelled manes and flowing tails, came prancing round, as if with wings; these too, born in the desert, came at the right time, of themselves.
132. A (herd of) pure-colour’d, well-proportioned cows, fat and fleshy, and remarkable for beauty, giving fragrant and pure milk with equal flow, came together in great number at this propitious time:
133. Enmity and envy gave way to peace; content and rest prevailed on every side, whilst there was closer union amongst the true of heart, discord and variance were entirely appeased;
134. The gentle air distilled a seasonable rain, no crash of storm or tempest was heard, the springing seeds, not waiting for their time, grew up apace and yielded abundant increase;
135. The five cereals grew ripe with scented grain, soft and glutinous, easy of digestion; all creatures big with young, possessed their bodies in ease and their frames well-gathered;
----------
136. All men, even those who had not received the seeds of instruction derived from the four holy ones; all these, throughout the world, born under the control of selfish appetite, without any thought for others’ goods,
137. Had no proud, envious longings; no angry, hateful thoughts. All men and women were grave (profound) as the first man of the age (kalpa).
138. All the temples of the gods and sacred shrines, the gardens, wells, and fountains, all these like things in heaven, produced of themselves, at the proper time, (their several adornments).
139. There was no famishing hunger, the soldiers’ weapons were at rest, all diseases disappeared; throughout the kingdom all the people were bound close in family love and friendship;
140. Piously affectioned they indulged in mutual pleasures, there were no impure or polluting desires, they sought their daily gain righteously, no covetous money-loving spirit prevailed,
141. But with religious purpose they gave liberally; there was no thought of any reward (return), but all practised the four rules of purity; and every hateful thought was suppressed and destroyed.
142. Even as in days gone by, Manu râga begat a child (called) ’Brilliancy of the Sun,’ on which there prevailed through the country great prosperity, and all Wickedness came to an end;
143. So now the king having begotten a royal prince, these marks of prosperity were seen; and because of such a concourse of propitious signs, the child was named Siddhârtha.
144. And now his royal mother, the queen Mâyâ, beholding her son born under such circumstances, beautiful as a child of heaven, adorned with every excellent distinction, 145. From excessive joy which could not be controlled died, and was born in heaven.
Then Pragâpatî Gautamî, beholding the prince, like an angel, 146. With beauty seldom seen on earth, seeing him thus born and now his mother dead, loved and nourished him as her own child; and the child regarded her as his mother.
147. So as the light of the sun or the moon, little by little increases, the royal child also increased each day in every mental excellency and beauty of person;
148. (His body exhaled) the perfume of priceless sandal wood, (decorated with) the famed Gambunada gold (gems); divine medicines (there were) to preserve him in health, glittering necklaces upon his person;
149. The members of tributary states, hearing that the king had an heir born to him, sent their presents and gifts of various kinds, oxen, sheep, deer, horses, and chariots,
150. Precious vessels and elegant ornaments, fit to delight the heart of the prince; but though presented with such pleasing trifles, the necklaces and other pretty ornaments,
151. The mind (nature) of the prince was unmoved, his bodily frame small indeed, but his heart established; his mind at rest within its own high purposes, was not to be disturbed by glittering baubles.
152. And now he was brought to learn the useful arts, when lo! once instructed (at one hearing) he surpassed his teachers. His father, the king, seeing his exceeding talent, and his deep purpose to have done with the world and its allurements,
153. Began to enquire as to the names of those in his tribe who were renowned for elegance and refinement. Elegant and graceful, and a lovely maiden, was she whom they called Yasodharâ;
154. In every way fitting to become a consort for the prince; and to allure by pleasant wiles his heart. The prince with a mind so far removed (from the world), with qualities so distinguished, and with so charming an appearance, 155. Like the elder son of Brahmadeva, Sanatkumâra (She-na Kiu-ma-lo);
the virtuous damsel, lovely and refined, gentle and subdued in manner; 156. Majestic like the queen of heaven, constant ever, cheerful night and day,
establishing the palace in purity and quiet, full of dignity and exceeding grace, 157. Like a lofty hill rising up in space; or as a white autumn cloud;
warm or cool according to the season; choosing a proper dwelling according to the year, 158. Surrounded by a return of singing women, who join (their voices) in harmonious heavenly concord, without any jarring or unpleasant sound, exciting (in the hearers) forgetfulness of worldly cares.
159. As the heavenly Gandharvas of themselves in their beauteous palaces (cause) the singing women to raise heavenly strains, the sounds of which and their beauty ravish both eyes and heart; 160. (So) Bodhisattva dwelt in his lofty palace, with music such as this.
The king his father, for the prince’s sake, dwelt purely in his palace, practising every virtue; 161. Delighting in the teaching of the true law, he put away from him every evil companion,
(that) his heart might not be polluted by lust; regarding inordinate desire as poison, 162. Keeping his passion and his body in due control, destroying and repressing all trivial thoughts,
desiring to enjoy virtuous conversation, loving instruction (fit) to subdue the hearts of men, 163. Aiming to accomplish the conversion of unbelievers; removing all schemes of opposition (from whatever source they came),
by the enlightening power of his doctrine, aiming to save the entire world; (thus he desired) that the body of people should obtain rest; 164. Even as we desire to give peace to our children, so did he long to give rest to the world.
He also attended to his religious duties (sacrificing by fire to all the spirits), with clasped hands adoring the moon (drinking the moon’s brightness); 165. Bathing his body in the waters of the Ganges; cleansing his heart in the waters of religion, performing his duties with no private aim, but regarding his child and the people at large,
166. Loving righteous conversation, righteous words with loving (aim), loving words with no mixture of falsehood, true words imbued by love,
167. And yet withal so modest and self-distrustful, unable on that account to speak as confident of truth; loving to all, and yet not loving the world, with no thought of selfishness or covetous desire,
168. Aiming to restrain the tongue and in quietness to find rest from wordy contentions, not seeking in the multitude of religious duties to condone for a worldly principle in action;
169. But aiming to benefit the world, by a liberal and unostentatious charity; the heart without any contentious thought, but resolved by goodness to subdue the contentious,
170. Composing the one, whilst protecting the seven, removing the seven, guarding and adjusting the five, reaching to the three, by having learned the three, knowing the two, and removing the two;
171. Desiring to mortify the passions, and to destroy every enemy of virtue, not multiplying coarse or unseemly words, but exhorting to virtue in the use of courteous language, 172. Full of sympathy and ready charity, pointing out and practising the way of mutual dependence,
receiving and understanding the wisdom of spirits and Rishis, crushing and destroying every cruel and hateful thought; 173. Thus his fame and virtue were widely renowned,
(and yet himself) finally (or, for ever) separate from the ties of the world, showing the ability of a master builder, laying a good foundation of virtue, an example for all the earth; 174. So a man’s heart composed and at rest, his limbs and all his members will also be at ease.
And now the son of Suddhodana, and his virtuous wife Yasodharâ, 175. As time went on, growing to full estate, their child Râhula was born;
and then Suddhodana râga considered thus, ’My son, the prince, having a son born to him, 176. ’The affairs of the empire will be handed down in succession, and there will be no end to its righteous government;
the prince having begotten a son, will love his son as I love him, 177. ’And no longer think about leaving his home as an ascetic, but devote himself to the practice of virtue; I now have found complete rest of heart, like one just born to heavenly joys.’
178. Like as in the first days of the kalpa, Rishi-kings by the way in which (they walked), practising pure and spotless deeds, offered up religious offerings, without harm to living thing,
179. And illustriously prepared an excellent karma, so the king excelling in the excellence of purity, in family and excellency of wealth, excelling in strength and every exhibition of prowess,
180. Reflected the glory of his name through the world, as the sun sheds abroad his thousand rays. But now, being the king of men (or, a king among men), he deemed it right to exhibit his son’s (prowess),
181. For the sake of his family and kin, to exhibit him; to increase his family’s renown, his glory spread so high as even to obtain the name of ’God begotten;’ and having partaken of these heavenly joys,
182. Enjoying the happiness of increased wisdom; understanding the truth, by his own righteousness derived from previous hearing of the truth; the reward of previous acts, widely known.
183. Would that this might lead my son (he prayed) to love his child and not forsake his home; the kings of all countries, whose sons have not yet grown up,
184. Have prevented them exercising authority in the empire, in order to give their minds relaxation, and for this purpose have provided them with worldly indulgences, so that they may perpetuate the royal seed;
185. So now the king, having begotten a royal son, indulged him in every sort of pleasure; desiring that he might enjoy these worldly delights, and not wish to wander from his home in search of wisdom;
186. In former times the Bodhisattva kings, although their way (life) has been restrained (severe), have yet enjoyed the pleasures of the world, and when they have begotten a son, then separating themselves from family ties, Have afterwards entered the solitude of the mountains, to prepare themselves in the way of a silent recluse.
----------
VARGA 3. DISGUST AT SORROW.
188. Without are pleasant garden glades, flowing fountains, pure refreshing lakes, with every kind of flower, and trees with fruit, arranged in rows, deep shade beneath. 189. There, too, are various kinds of wondrous birds, flying and sporting in the midst, and on the surface of the water the four kinds of flowers, bright colour’d, giving out their floating scent;
190. Minstrel maidens cause their songs, and chorded music, to invite the prince. He, hearing the sounds of singing, sighs for the pleasures of the garden shades, 191. And cherishing within these happy thoughts, he dwelt upon the joys of an outside excursion; even as the chained elephant ever longs for the free desert wilds.
192. The royal father, hearing that the prince would enjoy to wander through the gardens, first ordered all his attendant officers to adorn and arrange them, after their several offices:
193. To make level and smooth the king’s highway, to remove from the path all offensive matter, all old persons, diseased or deformed, all those suffering through poverty or great grief, 194. So that his son in his present humour might see nothing likely to afflict his heart.
----------
----------
The adornments being duly made, the prince was invited to an audience; 195. The king seeing his son approach, patted his head and looking at the colour of his face, feelings of sorrow and joy intermingled, bound him. His mouth willing to speak, his heart restrained.
196. (Now see) the jewel-fronted gaudy chariot; the four equally-pacing, stately horses; good-tempered and well-trained; young and of graceful appearance; 197. Perfectly pure and white, and draped with flowery coverings. In the same chariot stands the (stately) driver;
the streets were scattered over with flowers; precious drapery fixed on either side of the way, 198. With dwarfed trees lining the road, costly vessels employed for decoration, hanging canopies and variegated banners, silken curtains, moved by the rustling breeze,
199. Spectators arranged on either side of the path. With bodies bent and glistening eyes, eagerly gazing, but not rudely staring, as the blue lotus flower (they bent) drooping in the air,
200. Ministers and attendants flocking round him, as stars following the chief of the constellation; all uttering the same suppressed whisper of admiration, at a sight so seldom seen in the world;
201. Rich and poor, humble and exalted, old and young and middle-aged, all paid the greatest respect, and invoked blessings on the occasion:
202. So the country-folk and the town-folk, hearing that the prince was coming forth, the well-to-do not waiting for their servants, those asleep and awake not mutually calling to one another,
203. The six kinds of creatures not gathered together and penned, the money not collected and locked up, the doors and gates not fastened, all went pouring along the way on foot;
204. The towers were filled and the mounds by the trees, the windows and the terraces along the streets; with bent body fearing to lift their eyes, carefully seeing that there was nothing about them to offend,
----------
----------
----------
205. Those seated on high addressing those seated on the ground, those going on the road addressing those passing on high, the mind intent on one object alone; so that if a heavenly form had flown past, 206. Or a form entitled to highest respect, there would have been no distraction visible,
so intent was the body and so immovable the limbs. And now beautiful as the opening lily, 207. He advances towards the garden glades, wishing to accomplish the words of the holy prophet (Rishi).
The prince seeing the ways prepared and watered, and the joyous holiday appearance of the people, 208. (Seeing too) the drapery and the chariot pure, bright, shining, his heart exulted greatly and rejoiced.
The people (on their part) gazed at the prince, so beautifully adorned, with all his retinue, 209. Like an assembled company of kings (gathered) to see a heaven-born prince.
----------
----------
----------
And now a Deva-râga of the Pure abode, suddenly appears by the side of the road; 210. His form changed into that of an old man, struggling for life, his heart weak and oppressed.
The prince seeing the old man, filled with apprehension, asked his charioteer,
211. ’What kind of man is this? his head white and his shoulders bent, his eyes bleared and his body withered, holding a stick to support him along the way. 212. ’Is his body suddenly dried up by the heat, or has he been born in this way?’
The charioteer, his heart much embarrassed, scarcely dared to answer truly, 213. Till the pure-born (Deva) added his spiritual power, and caused him to frame a reply in true words:
’His appearance changed, his vital powers decayed, filled with sorrow, with little pleasure, 214. ’His spirits gone, his members nerveless, these are the indications of what is called "old age."
This man was once a sucking child, brought up and nourished at his mother’s breast, 215. ’And as a youth full of sportive life, handsome, and in enjoyment of the five pleasures; as years passed on, his frame decaying, he is brought now to the waste of age.’
216. The prince greatly agitated and moved, asked his charioteer another question and said, ’Is yonder man the only one afflicted with age, or shall I, and others also, be such as he?’
217. The charioteer again replied and said, ’Your highness also inherits this lot, as time goes on, the form itself is changed, and this must doubtless come, beyond all hindrance: 218. ’The youthful form must wear the garb of age, throughout the world, this is the common lot.’
Bodhisattva, who had long prepared the foundation of pure and spotless wisdom, 219. Broadly setting the root of every high quality, with a view to gather large fruit in his present life, hearing these words respecting the sorrow of age, was afflicted in mind, and his hair stood up-right.
220. Just as the roll of the thunder and the storm alarm and put to flight the cattle; so was Bodhisattva affected by the words; shaking with apprehension, he deeply sighed;
221. Constrained at heart because of the pain of ’age;’ with shaking head and constant gaze, he thought upon this misery of decay; what joy or pleasure can men take (he thought),
222. In that which soon must wither, stricken by the marks of age; affecting all without exception; though gifted now with youth and strength, yet not one but soon must change and pine away. 223. The eye beholding such signs as these before it, how can it not be oppressed by a desire to escape?
Bodhisattva then addressed his charioteer, `Quickly turn your chariot and go back, 224. ’Ever thinking on this subject of old age approaching, what pleasures now can these gardens afford,
the years of my life like the fast-flying wind; turn your chariot, and with speedy wheels take me to my palace.’ 225. And so his heart keeping in the same sad tone, (he was) as one who returns to a place of entombment; unaffected by any engagement or employment, so he found no rest in anything within his home. 226. The king hearing of his son’s sadness urged (his companions) to induce him again to go abroad, and forthwith incited his ministers and attendants to decorate the gardens even more than before.
227. The Deva then caused himself to appear as a sick man; struggling for life, he stood by the wayside, his body swollen and disfigured, sighing with deep-drawn groans, 228. His hands and knees contracted and sore with disease, his tears flowing as he piteously muttered (his petition).
The prince asked his charioteer, ’What sort of man, again, is this?’
229. Replying he said, ’This is a sick man. The four elements all confused and disordered, worn and feeble, with no remaining strength, bent down with weakness, looking to his fellow-men for help.’
230. The prince hearing the words thus spoken, immediately became sad and depressed in heart, and asked, ’Is this the only man afflicted thus, or are others liable to the same (calamity)?’
231. In reply he said, ’Through all the world, men are subject to the same condition; those who have bodies must endure affliction, the poor and ignorant, as well as the rich and great.’
232. The prince, when these words met his ears, was oppressed with anxious thought and grief; his body and his mind were moved throughout, just as the moon upon the ruffled tide.
233. ’Placed thus in the great furnace of affliction, say! what rest or quiet can there be! Alas! that worldly men, (blinded by) ignorance and oppressed with dark delusion, 234. ’Though the robber sickness may appear at any time, yet live with blithe and joyous hearts!’
----------
On this, turning his chariot back again, he grieved to think upon the pain of sickness. 235. As a man beaten and wounded sore, with body weakened, leans upon his staff, so dwelt he in the seclusion of his palace, lone-seeking, hating worldly pleasures.
236. The king hearing once more of his son’s return, asked anxiously the reason why, and in reply was told--’he saw the pain of sickness.’ The king in fear like one beside himself, 237. Roundly blamed the keepers of the way; his heart constrained, his lips spoke not;
again he increased the crowd of music women, the sounds of merriment twice louder than aforetime, 238. If by these sounds and sights (the prince) might be gratified; and indulging worldly feelings, might not hate his home. Night and day the charm of melody increased, but his heart was still unmoved by it.
----------
239. The king himself then went forth to observe everything successively, and to make the gardens even yet more attractive, selecting with care the attendant women, that they might excel in every point of personal beauty; 240. Quick in wit and able to arrange matters well, fit to ensnare men by their winning looks;
he placed additional keepers along the king’s way, he strictly ordered every offensive sight to be removed, 241. And earnestly exhorted the illustrious coachman, to look well and pick out the road as he went.
And now that Deva of the pure abode, again caused the appearance of a dead man; 242. Four persons carrying the corpse lifted it on high, and appeared (to be going on) in front of Bodhisattva; the surrounding people saw it not, but only Bodhisattva and the charioteer;
243. (Once more) he asked, ’What is this they carry? with streamers and flowers of every choice description, whilst the followers are overwhelmed with grief, tearing their hair and wailing piteously.’
244. And now the gods instructing the coachman, he replied and said,
’This is a "dead man," all his powers of body destroyed, life departed; his heart without thought, his intellect dispersed; 245. ’His spirit gone, his form withered and decayed; stretched out as a dead log; family ties broken --all his friends who once loved him, clad in white cerements, 246. ’Now no longer delighting to behold him, remove him to lie in some hollow ditch (tomb).’
The prince hearing the name of DEATH, his heart constrained by painful thoughts, 247. He asked, ’Is this the only dead man, or does the world contain like instances?’
Replying thus he said, ’All, everywhere, the same; he who begins his life must end it likewise; 248. ’The strong and lusty and the middle-aged, having a body, cannot but decay (and die).’
The prince now harassed and perplexed in mind; his body bent upon the chariot leaning-board, 249. With bated breath and struggling accents, stammered thus, ’Oh worldly men! how fatally deluded!
beholding everywhere the body brought to dust, yet everywhere the more carelessly living; 250. ’The heart is neither lifeless wood nor stone, and yet it thinks not "all is vanishing!"’
Then turning, he directed his chariot to go back, and no longer waste his time in wandering. 251. How could he, whilst in fear of instant death, go wandering here and there with lightened heart!
The charioteer remembering the king’s exhortation feared much nor dared go back; 252. Straightforward then he pressed his panting steeds, passed onward to the gardens,
(came to) the groves and babbling streams of crystal water, the pleasant trees, spread out with gaudy verdure,
253. The noble living things and varied beasts so wonderful, the flying creatures and their notes melodious, all charming and delightful td the eye and ear, even as the heavenly Nandavana.
----------
VARGA 4. PUTTING AWAY DESIRE.
254. The prince on entering the garden, the women came around to pay him court; and to arouse in him thoughts frivolous; with ogling ways and deep design,
255. Each one setting herself off to best advantage; or joining together in harmonious concert, clapping their hands, or moving their feet in unison, or joining close, body to body, limb to limb;
256. Or indulging in smart repartees, and mutual smiles; or assuming a thoughtful saddened countenance, and so by sympathy to please the prince, and provoke in him a heart affected by love.
251. But all the women beheld the prince, clouded in brow, and his godlike body not exhibiting its wonted signs of beauty; fair in bodily appearance, surpassingly lovely,
258. All looked upwards as they gazed, as when we call upon the moon Deva to come; but all their subtle devices were ineffectual to move Bodhisattva’s heart.
----------
259. At last commingling together they join and look astonished and in fear, silent without a word. Then there was a Brahmaputra, whose name was called Udâyi (Yau-to-i).
260. (He) addressing the women, said, ’Now all of you, so graceful and fair, (see if you cannot) by your combined power hit on some device; for beauty’s power is not for ever.
261. ’Still it holds the world in bondage, by secret ways and lustful arts; but no such loveliness in all the world (as yours), equal to that of heavenly nymphs;
----------
262. ’The gods beholding it would leave their queens, spirits and Rishis would be misled by it; why not then the prince, the son of an earthly king? why should not his feelings be aroused?
263. ’This prince indeed, though he restrains his heart and holds it fixed, pure-minded, with virtue uncontaminated, not to be overcome by power of women;
----------
----------
----------
264. ’(Yet) of old there was Sundarî (Su-to-li) able to destroy the great Rishi, and to lead him to indulge in love, and so degrade his boasted eminence; 265. ’Undergoing long penance, Gautama fell likewise (by the arts of) a heavenly queen;
----------
----------
Shing-kü, a Rishi putra, practising lustful indulgences according to fancy, (was lost). 266. ’The Brahman Rishi Visvâmitra (Pi-she-po), living religiously for ten thousand years, deeply ensnared by a heavenly queen, in one day was completely shipwreck’d in faith;
----------
267. ’Thus those enticing women, by their power, overcame the Brahman ascetics how much more may ye, by your arts, overpower (the resolves) of the king’s son; 268. ’Strive therefore after new devices, let not the king fail in a successor to the throne;
----------
women, altho’ naturally weak, are high and potent in the way of ruling men. 269. ’What may not their arts accomplish in promoting in men a lustful (impure) desire?’
At this time all the attendant women, hearing throughout the words of Udâyi, 270. Increasing their powers of pleasing, as the quiet horse when touched by the whip, went into the presence of the royal prince, and each one strove in the practice of every kind of art,
271. (They) joined in music and in smiling conversation, raising their eyebrows, showing their white teeth, with ogling looks, glancing one at the other, their light drapery exhibiting their white bodies, 272. Daintily moving with mincing gait, acting the part of a bride as if coming gradually nearer,
desiring to promote in him a feeling of love, remembering the words of the great king, 273. ’With dissolute form and slightly clad, forgetful of modesty and womanly reserve.’
The prince with resolute heart was silent and still, with unmoved face (he sat); 274. Even as the great elephant-dragon, whilst the entire herd moves round him;
so nothing could disturb or move his heart, dwelling in their midst as in a confined room. 275. Like the divine Sakra, around whom all the Devîs assemble, so was the prince as he dwelt in the gar-dens; (the maidens) encircling him thus;
----------
----------
----------
276. Some arranging their dress, others washing their hands or feet, others perfuming their bodies with scent, others twining flowers for decoration,
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
277. Others making strings for jewelled necklets, others rubbing or striking their bodies, others resting, or lying, one beside the other, others, with head inclined, whispering secret words,
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
278. Others engaged in common sports, others talking of amorous things, others assuming lustful attitudes, striving thus to move his heart;
279. But Bodhisattva, peaceful and collected, firm as a rock, difficult to move, hearing all these women’s talk, unaffected either to joy or sorrow,
280. Was driven still more to serious thought, sighing to witness such strange conduct, and beginning to understand the women’s design, by these means to disconcert his mind,
281. ’Not knowing that youthful beauty soon falls, destroyed by old age and death, fading and perishing! This is the great distress! What ignorance and delusion (he reflected) overshadow their minds,
282. ’Surely they ought to consider old age, disease, and death, and day and night stir themselves up to exertion, whilst this sharp double-edged sword hangs over the neck. What room for sport or laughter,
283. ’Beholding those (monsters) old age, disease, and death? A man who is unable to resort to this inward knowledge, what is he but a wooden or a plaster man, what heart-consideration in such a case!
----------
----------
284. ’Like the double tree that appears in the desert, with leaves and fruit all perfect and ripe, the first cut down and destroyed, the other unmoved by apprehension, 285. ’So it is in the case of the mass of men, they have no understanding either!’
At this time Udâyi came to the place where the prince was, 286. And observing his silent and thoughtful mien, unmoved by any desire for indulgence (the five desires),
he forthwith addressed the prince, and said, ’The Mahâraga, by his former appointment, 287. ’Has selected me to act as friend to his son; may I therefore speak some friendly words?
an enlightened friendship (or, friend) is of three sorts, that which removes things unprofitable, 288. ’Promotes that which is real gain, and stands by a friend in adversity.
I claim the name of "enlightened friend," and would renounce all that is magisterial, 289. ’But yet not speak lightly or with indifference. What then are the three sources of advantage? listen, and I will now utter true words, and prove myself a true and sincere adviser.
290. ’When the years are fresh and ripening, beauty and pleasing qualities in bloom, not to give proper weight to woman’s influence, this is a weak man’s policy (body). 291. ’It is right sometimes to be of a crafty mind, submitting to those little subterfuges,
which find a place in the heart’s undercurrents, and obeying what those thoughts suggest, 292. ’In way of pleasures to be got from dalliance, this is no wrong in woman’s (eye)! even if now the heart has no desire, yet it is fair to follow such devices;
293. ’Agreement (acquiescence) is the joy of woman’s heart, acquiescence is the substance (the full) of true adornment; but if a man reject these overtures, he’s like a tree deprived of leaves and fruits;
294. ’Why then ought you to yield and acquiesce? that you may share in all these things. Because in taking, there’s an end of trouble--no light and changeful thoughts then worry us.
----------
----------
295. ’For pleasure is the first and foremost thought of all, the gods themselves cannot dispense with it. Lord Sakra was drawn by it to love the wife of Gautama the Rishi;
296. ’So likewise the Rishi Agastya, through a long period of discipline, practising austerities, from hankering after a heavenly queen (Devî), lost all reward of his religious endeavours,
----------
----------
297. ’The Rishi Brihaspati, and Kandradeva putra; the Rishi Parâsara, and Kavañgara (Kia-pin-ke-lo): 298. ’All these, out of many others, were overcome by woman’s love.
----------
----------
----------
----------
How much more then, in your case, should you partake in such pleasant joys; 299. ’Nor refuse, with wilful heart, to participate in the worldly delights, which your present station, possessed of such advantages, offers you, in the presence of these attendants.’
----------
300. At this time the royal prince, hearing the words of his friend Udâyi, so skilfully put, with such fine distinction, cleverly citing worldly instances,
301. Answered thus to Udâyi: ’Thank you for having spoken sincerely to me, let me likewise answer you in the same way, and let your heart suspend its judgment whilst you listen;
302. ’It is not that I am careless about beauty, or am ignorant of (the power of) human joys, but only that I see on all the impress of change; therefore my heart is sad and heavy;
303. ’If these things were sure of lasting, without the ills of age, disease, and death, then would I too take my fill of love; and to the end find no disgust or sadness;
304. ’If you will undertake to cause these women’s beauty not after-while to change or wither, then, though the joy of love may have its evil, still it might hold the mind in thraldom;
305. (’To know that other) men grow old, sicken, and die, would be enough to rob such joys of satisfaction; yet how much more in their own case (knowing this) would discontentment fill the mind;
306. ’(To know) such pleasures hasten to decay, and their bodies likewise; if, notwithstanding this, men yield to the power of love, their case indeed is like the very beasts.
307. ’And now you cite the names of many Rishis, who practised lustful ways in life; their cases likewise cause me sorrow, for in that they did these things, they perished.
308. ’Again, you cite the name of that illustrious king, who freely gratified his passions, but he, in like way, perished in the act; know, then, that he was not a conqueror (Gina);
309. ’With smooth words to conceal an intrigue, and to persuade one’s neighbour to consent, and by consenting to defile his mind; how can this be called a just device?
310. ’It is but to seduce one with a hollow lie,--such ways are not for me to practise; or, for those who love the truth and honesty; for they are, forsooth, unrighteous ways,
311. ’And such a disposition is hard to reverence; shaping one’s conduct after one’s likings, liking this or that, and seeing no harm in it, what method of experience is this!
312. ’A hollow compliance, and a protesting heart, such method is not for me to follow; but this I know, old age, disease, and death, these are the great afflictions which accumulate,
313. And overwhelm me with their presence; on these I find no friend to speak, alas! alas! Udâyi! these, after all, are the great concerns;
314. ’The pain of birth, old age, disease, and death; this grief is that we have to fear; the eyes see all things falling to decay, and yet the heart finds joy in following them;
315. ’But I have little strength of purpose, or command; this heart of mine is feeble and distraught, reflecting thus on age, disease, and death. Distracted, as I never was before; 316. ’Sleepless by night and day, how can I then indulge in pleasure?
Old age, disease, and death consuming me, their certainty beyond a doubt, 317. ’And still to have no heavy thoughts, in truth my heart would be a log or stone.’
Thus the prince, for Uda’s sake, used every kind of skilful argument, 318. Describing all the pains of pleasure; and not perceiving that the day declined.
And now the waiting women all, with music and their various attractions, 319. Seeing that all were useless for the end, with shame began to flock back to the city;
the prince beholding all the gardens, bereft of their gaudy ornaments, 320. The women all returning home, the place becoming silent and deserted, felt with twofold strength the thought of impermanence. With saddened mien going back, he entered his palace;
321. The king, his father, hearing of the prince, his heart estranged from thoughts of pleasure, was greatly overcome with sorrow, and like a sword it pierced his heart. 322. Forthwith assembling all his council, he sought of them some means to gain his end; they all replied, ’These sources of desire are not enough to hold and captivate his heart.’
----------
VARGA 5. LEAVING THE CITY.
323. And so the king increased the means for gratifying the appetite for pleasure; both night and day the joys of music wore out the prince, opposed to pleasure; 324. Disgusted with them, he desired their absence, his mind was weaned from all such thoughts, he only thought of age, disease, and death; as the lion wounded by an arrow.
325. The king then sent his chief ministers, and the most distinguished of his family, young in years and eminent for beauty, as well as for wisdom and dignity of manners, 326. To accompany, and rest with him, both night and day, in order to influence the prince’s mind.
And now within a little interval, the prince again requested the king that he might go abroad. 327. Once more the chariot and the well-paced horses were prepared, adorned with precious substances and every gem; and then with all the nobles, his associates, surrounding him, he left the city gates:
328. Just as the four kinds of flower, when the sun shines, open out their leaves, so was the prince in all his spiritual splendour; effulgent in the beauty of his youth time;
329. As he proceeded to the gardens from the city, the road was well prepared, smooth, and wide, the trees were bright with flowers and fruit, his heart was joyous, and forgetful of its care.
330. Now by the roadside as he beheld the ploughmen, plodding along the furrows, and the writhing worms, his heart again was moved with piteous feeling, and anguish pierced his soul afresh; 331. To see those labourers at their toil, struggling with painful work, their bodies bent, their hair dishevelled, the dripping sweat upon their faces, their persons fouled with mud and dust; 332. The ploughing oxen, too, bent by the yokes, their lolling tongues and gaping mouths; the nature of the prince, loving, compassionate, his mind conceived most poignant sorrow,
333. And nobly moved to sympathy, he groaned with pain; then stooping down he sat upon the ground, and watched this painful scene of suffering; reflecting on the ways of birth and death! 334. ’Alas! he cried, for all the world! how dark and ignorant, void of understanding!’ And then to give his followers chance of rest, he bade them each repose where’er they list;
335. Whilst he beneath the shadow of a Gambu tree, gracefully seated, gave himself to thought. He pondered on the fact of life and death, inconstancy, and endless progress to decay.
----------
336. His heart thus fixed without confusion, the five desires (senses) covered and clouded over, lost in possession of enlightenment and insight, he entered on the first pure state of ecstacy.
337. All low desire removed, most perfect peace ensued; and fully now in Samâdhi (he saw) the misery and utter sorrow of the world; the ruin wrought by age; disease, and death;
338. The great misery following on the body’s death and yet men not awakened to the truth! oppressed with others’ suffering (age, disease, and death), this load of sorrow weigh’d his mind;
339. ’I now will seek (he said) a noble law, unlike the worldly methods known to men, I will oppose disease and age and death, and strive against the mischief wrought by these on men.’
340. Thus lost in tranquil contemplation, (he considered that) youth, vigour, and strength of life, constantly renewing themselves, without long stay, in the end fulfil the rule of ultimate destruction;
341. (Thus he pondered) without excessive joy or grief, without hesitation or confusion of thought, without dreaminess or extreme longing, without aversion or discontent, 342. But perfectly at peace, with no hindrance, radiant with the beams of increased illumination.
At this time a Deva of the Pure abode, transforming himself into the shape of a Bhikshu, 343. Came to the place where the prince was seated;
the prince with due consideration rose to meet him, and asked him who he was. In reply he said, ’I am a Shâman, 344. ’Depressed and sad at thought of age, disease, and death, I have left my home to seek some way of rescue,
but everywhere I find old age, disease, and death, all (things) hasten to decay and there is no permanency; 345. ’Therefore I search for the happiness of something that decays not, that never perishes, that never knows beginning,
that looks with equal mind on enemy and friend, that heeds not wealth nor beauty, 346. ’The happiness of one who finds repose alone in solitude, in some unfrequented dell,
free from molestation, all thoughts about the world destroyed, dwelling in some lonely hermitage, 347. ’Untouched by any worldly source of pollution, begging for food sufficient for the body.’ And forthwith as he stood before the prince, gradually rising up he disappeared in space.
348. The prince with joyful mind, considering, recollected former Buddhas, established thus in perfect dignity of manner; with noble mien and presence, as this visitor. 349. Thus calling things to mind with perfect self-possession, he reached the thought of righteousness,
and by what means it can be gained. Indulging thus for length of time in thoughts of religious solitude, 350. He now suppressed his feelings and controlled his members, and rising turned again towards the city.
His followers all flocked after him, calling him to stop and not go far from them, 351. But in his mind these secret thoughts so held him, devising means by which to escape from the world,
that tho’ his body moved along the road, his heart was far away among the mountains; 352. Even as the bound and captive elephant, ever thinks about his desert wilds.
----------
The prince now entering the city, there met him men and women, earnest for their several ends; 353. The old besought him for their children, the young sought something for the wife, others sought something for their brethren; all those allied by kinship or by family,
354. Aimed to obtain their several suits, all of them joined in relationship dreading the pain (expectation) of separation. And now the prince’s heart was filled with joy, as he suddenly heard those words ’separation and association.’ 355. ’These are joyful sounds to me,’ he said, ’they assure me that my vow shall be accomplished.’ Then deeply pondering the joy of ’snapped relationship,’ the idea of Nirvâna, deepened and widened in him, 356. His body as a peak of the Golden Mount, his shoulder like the elephant’s, his voice like the spring-thunder, his deep-blue eye like that of the king of oxen, 357. His mind full of religious thoughts (aims), his face bright as the full moon, his step like that of the lion king, thus he entered his palace,
358. Even as the son of Lord Sakra (or, Sakra-putra) his mind reverential, his person dignified, he went straight to his father’s presence, and with head inclined, enquired, ’Is the king well?’ 359. Then he explained his dread of age, disease, and death, and sought respectfully permission to become a hermit. ’For all things in the world’ (he said), ’though now united, tend to separation;’ 360. Therefore he prayed to leave the world; desiring to find ’true deliverance.’
His royal father hearing the words ’leave the world,’ was forthwith seized with great heart-trembling, 361. Even as the strong wild elephant shakes with his weight the boughs of some young sapling; going forward, seizing the prince’s hands, with falling tears, he spake as follows:
362. ’Stop! nor speak such words, the time is not yet come for "a religious life," you are young and strong, your heart beats full, to lead a religious life frequently involves trouble,
363. ’It is rarely possible to hold the desires in check, the heart not yet estranged from their enjoyment; to leave your home and lead a painful ascetic life, your heart can hardly yet resolve on such a course;
364. ’To dwell amidst the desert wilds or lonely dells, this heart of yours would not be perfectly at rest, for though you love religious matters, you are not yet like me in years; 365. ’You should undertake the kingdom’s government, and let me first adopt ascetic life; but to give up your father and your sacred duties, this is not to act religiously;
366. ’You should suppress this thought of "leaving home," and undertake your worldly duties, find your delight in getting an illustrious name, and after this give up your home and family.’
367. The prince, with proper reverence and respectful feelings, again besought his royal father; but promised if he could be saved from four calamities, that he would give up the thought of ’leaving home;’
368. If he would grant him life without end, no disease, nor undesirable old age, and no decay of earthly possessions; then he would obey and give up the thought of ’leaving home.’
369. The royal father then addressed the prince, ’Speak not such words as these, for with respect to these four things, who is there able to prevent them, or say nay to their approach; 370. ’Asking such things as these (four things), you would provoke men’s laughter! But put away this thought of "leaving home," and once more take yourself to pleasure.’ 371. The prince again besought his father, ’If you may not grant me these four prayers, then let me go I pray, and leave my home. O! place no difficulties in my path;
372. ’Your son is dwelling in a burning house, would you indeed prevent his leaving it! To solve a doubt is only reasonable, who could forbid a man to seek its explanation?
373. ’Or if he were forbidden, then by self-destruction he might solve the difficulty, in an unrighteous way: and if he were to do so, who could restrain him after death?’
374. The royal father, seeing his son’s mind so firmly fixed that it could not be turned, and that it would be waste of strength to bandy further words or arguments,
375. Forthwith commanded more attendant women, to provoke still more his mind to pleasure; day and night (he ordered them) to keep the roads and ways, to the end that he might not leave his palace; 376. (He moreover ordered) all the ministers of the country to come to the place where dwelt the prince, to quote and illustrate the rules of filial piety, hoping to cause him to obey the wishes of the king.
377. The prince, beholding his royal father bathed with tears and o’erwhelmed with grief, forthwith returned to his abode, and sat himself in silence to consider;
378. All the women of the palace, coming towards him, waited as they circled him, and gazed in silence on his beauteous form. They gazed upon him not with furtive glance, 379. But like the deer in autumn brake looks wistfully at the hunter; around the prince’s straight and handsome form, (bright) as the mountain of true gold (Sumeru), 380. The dancing women gathered doubtingly, waiting to hear him bid them sound their music; repressing every feeling of the heart through fear, even as the deer within the brake;
381. Now gradually the day began to wane, the prince still sitting in the evening light, his glory streaming forth in splendour, as the sun lights up Mount Sumeru;
382. Thus seated on his jewelled couch, surrounded by the fumes of sandal-wood, the dancing women took their places round; then sounded forth their heavenly (Gandharva) music, 383. Even as Vaisaman (Vaisravana) produces every kind of rare and heavenly sounds.
----------
The thoughts which dwelt within the prince’s mind entirely drove from him desire for music, 384. And tho’ the sounds filled all the place, they fell upon his ear unnoticed.
At this time the Deva of the Pure abode, knowing the prince’s time was come, 385. The destined time for quitting home, suddenly assumed a form and came to earth, to make the shapes of all the women unattractive, so that they might create disgust,
386. And no desire arise from thought of beauty. Their half-clad forms bent in ungainly attitudes, forgetful in their sleep, their bodies crooked or supine, the instruments of music lying scattered in disorder; 387. Leaning and facing one another, or with back to back, or like those beings thrown into the abyss,
----------
----------
their jewelled necklets bound about like chains, their clothes and undergarments swathed around their persons; 388. Grasping their instruments, stretched along the earth, even as those undergoing punishment at the hands of keepers (eunuchs), their garments in confusion, or like the broken kani flower (poppy?);
389. Or some with bodies leaning in sleep against the wall, in fashion like a hanging bow or horn, or with their hands holding to the window-frames, and looking like an outstretched corpse; 390. Their mouths half opened or else gaping wide, the loathsome dribble trickling forth,
----------
their heads uncovered and in wild disorder, like some unreasoning madman’s; 391. The flower wreaths torn and hanging across their face, or slipping off the face upon the ground; others with body raised as if in fearful dread, just like the lonely desert(?) bird;
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
392. Or others pillowed on their neighbour’s lap, their hands and feet entwined together, whilst others smiled or knit their brows in turn, some with eyes closed and open mouth, 393. Their bodies lying in wild disorder, stretched here and there, like corpses thrown together.
----------
----------
And now the prince seated, in his beauty, looked with thought on all the waiting women; 394. Before, they had appeared exceeding lovely, their laughing words, their hearts so light and gay, their forms so plump and young, their looks so bright; but now, how changed! so uninviting and repulsive.
395. And such is woman’s disposition! how can they, then, be ever dear, or closely trusted; such false appearances! and unreal pretences; they only madden and delude the minds of men. 396. And now (he said), ’I have awakened to the truth! Resolved am I to leave such false society.’ At this time the Deva of the Pure abode descended and approached, unfastening the doors. 397. The prince, too, at this time rose and walked along, amid the prostrate forms of all the women; with difficulty reaching to the inner hall, he called to Kandaka, in these words,
398. ’My mind is now athirst and longing for the draught of the fountain of sweet dew, saddle then my horse, and quickly bring it here. I wish to reach the deathless city; 399. ’My heart is fixed beyond all change, resolved I am and bound by sacred oath;
these women, once so charming and enticing, now behold I altogether loathsome; 400. ’The gates, which were before fast-barred and locked, now stand free and open! these evidences of something supernatural, point to a climax of my life.’
----------
----------
----------
----------
401. Then Kandaka stood reflecting inwardly, whether to obey or not the prince’s order, without informing his royal father of it, and so incur the heaviest punishment.
402. The Devas then gave spiritual strength; and unperceived the horse equipped came round, with even pace; a gallant steed, with all his jewelled trappings for a rider;
403. High-maned, with flowing tail, broad-backed, short-haired and ear’d, with belly like the deer’s, head like the king of parrots, wide forehead, round and claw-shaped nostrils,
404. Breath like the dragon’s, with breast and shoulders square, true and sufficient marks of his high breed. The royal prince, stroking the horse’s neck, and rubbing down his body, said,
405. ’My royal father ever rode on thee, and found thee brave in fight slid fearless of the foe; now I desire to rely on thee alike! to carry me far off to the stream (ford) of endless life,
406. ’To fight against and overcome the opposing force of men, the men who associate in search of pleasure, the men who engage in the search after wealth, the crowds who follow and flatter such persons;
407. ’In opposing sorrow, friendly help is difficult (to find), in seeking religious truth there must be rare enlightenment, let us then be knit together thus as friends; then, at last, there will be rest from sorrow.
408. ’But now I wish to go abroad, to give deliverance from pain; now then, for your own sake it is, and for the sake of all your kind, 409. ’That you should exert your strength, with noble pace, without lagging or weariness.’
Having thus exhorted him, he bestrode his horse, and grasping the reins, proceeded forth; 410. The man like the sun shining forth from his tabernacle (sun-palace streams), the horse like the white floating cloud (the white cloud-pile),
----------
exerting himself but without exciting haste, his breath concealed and without snorting; 411. Four spirits (Devas) accompanying him, held up his feet, heedfully concealing (his advance), silently and without noise; the heavy gates fastened and barred (locked), the heavenly spirits of themselves caused to open;
----------
412. Reverencing deeply the virtuous (sinless) father, loving deeply the unequalled son, equally affected with love towards all the members of his family (these. Devas took their place). 413. Suppressing his feelings, but not extinguishing his memory,
lightly he advanced and proceeded beyond the city, pure and spotless as the lily flowers which spring from the mud; 414. Looking up with earnestness at his father’s palace, he announced his purpose--unwitnessed and unwritten--’If I escape not birth, old age, and death, for evermore I pass not thus along;’
415. All the concourse of Devas, the space-filling Nâgas and spirits followed joyfully and exclaimed Well! well! (sâdhu), in confirmation of the true words (he spoke);
416. The Nâgas and the company of Devas acquired a condition of heart difficult to obtain, and each with his own inherent light led on the way shedding forth their brightness.
417. Thus man and horse both strong of heart went onwards, lost to sight, like streaming stars, but ere the eastern quarter flashed with light, they had advanced three yoganas.
----------
KIOUEN II. VARGA 6. THE RETURN OF KANDAKA.
418. And now the night was in a moment gone, and sight restored to all created things, (when the royal prince) looked thro’ the wood, and saw the abode of Po-ka, the Rishi; [the hermitage of the Bhârgavides, see Burnouf, Introduction to Ind. Bud. p. 385]; 419. The purling streams so exquisitely pure and sparkling, and the wild beasts all unalarmed at man, caused the royal prince’s heart to exult.
Tired, the horse stopped of his own will, to breathe. 420. ’This, then,’ he thought, ’is a good sign and fortunate, and doubtless indicates divine approval.’
And now he saw belonging to the Rishi, the various vessels used for (asking) charity; 421. And (other things) arranged by him in order, without the slightest trace of negligence.
Dismounting then he stroked his horse’s head, and cried, ’You now have borne me (well)!’ 422. With loving eyes he looked at Kandaka, (eyes) like the pure cool surface of a placid lake (and said),
’Swift-footed! like a horse in pace, yea! swift as any light-winged bird, 423. ’Ever have you followed after me when riding, and deeply have I felt my debt of thanks,
but not yet had you been tried in other ways; I only knew you as a man true-hearted, 424. ’My mind now wonders at your active powers of body;
these two I now begin to see (are yours); a man may have a heart most true and faithful, but strength of body may not too be his; 425. ’Bodily strength and perfect honesty of heart, I now have proof enough are yours.
----------
(To be content) to leave the tinselled world, and with swift foot to follow me, 426. ’Who would do this but for some profit, if without profit to his kin, who would not shun it? but you, with no private aim, have followed me, not seeking any present recompense;
427. ’As we nourish and bring up a child, to bind together and bring honour to a family; so we also reverence and obey a father, to gain (obedience and attention) from a begotten son; 428. ’In this way all think of their own advantage; but you have come with me disdaining profit;
with many words I cannot hold you here, so let me say in brief to you, 429. ’We have now ended our relationship; take, then, my horse and ride back again; for me, during the long night past, that place I sought to reach now I have obtained.’
430. Then taking off his precious neck-chain, he handed it to Kandaka, ’Take this,’ he said, ’I give it you, let it console you in your sorrow;’
431. The precious jewel in the tire (sic--JBH) that bound his head, bright-shining, lighting up his person, taking off and placing in his extended palm, like the sun which lights up Sumeru,
432. He said, ’O Kandaka! take this gem, and going back to where my father is, take the jewel and lay it reverently before him, to signify my heart’s relation to him; 433. ’And then, for me, request the king to stifle every fickle feeling of affection,
and say that I, to escape from birth and age and death, have entered on the wild (forest) of painful discipline, 434. ’Not that I may get a heavenly birth, much less because I have no tenderness of heart, or that I cherish any cause of bitterness, but only that I may escape this weight of sorrow;
435. ’The accumulated long-night weight of covetous desire (love), I now desire to ease the load (cause a break), so that it may be overthrown for ever; therefore I seek the way (cause) of ultimate escape; 436. ’If I should obtain emancipation, then shall I never need to put away my kindred,
to leave my home, to sever ties of love. O! grieve not for your son! 437. ’The five desires of sense beget the sorrow; those held by lust themselves induce the sorrow;
my very ancestors, victorious kings, thinking (their throne) established and immovable, 438. ’Have handed down to me their kingly wealth;
----------
I, thinking only on religion, put it all away; the royal mothers at the end of life their cherished treasures leave for their sons, 439. ’Those sons who covet much such worldly profit;
but I rejoice to have acquired religious wealth; if you say that I am young and tender, and that the time for seeking wisdom is not come, 440. ’You ought to know that to seek true religion, there never is a time not fit;
impermanence and fickleness, the hate of death, these ever follow us, 441. ’And therefore I (embrace) the present day, convinced that now is time to seek religion.
With such entreaties as the above, you must make matters plain on my behalf; 442. ’But, pray you cause my father not to think longingly after me;
let him destroy all recollection of me, and cut out from his soul the ties of love; 443. ’And you, grieve not because of what I say, but recollect to give the king my message.’
Kandaka hearing respectfully the words of exhortation, blinded and confused through choking sorrow, 444. With hands outstretched did worship; and answering the prince, he spoke,
’The orders that you give me, will, I fear, add grief to grief; 445. ’And sorrow thus increased will deepen, as the elephant who struggles into deeper mire.
When the ties of love are rudely snapped, who, that has any heart, would not grieve! 446. ’The golden ore may still by stamping be broken up, how much more the feelings choked with sorrow!
the prince has grown up in a palace, with every care bestowed upon his tender person, 447. ’And now he gives his body to the rough and thorny forest; how will he be able to bear a life of privation?
When first you ordered me to equip your steed, my mind was indeed sorely troubled, 448. ’But the heavenly powers urged me on, causing me to hasten the preparation (of the horse),
but what is the intention that urges the prince, to resolve thus to leave his secure palace? 449. ’The people of Kapilavastu, and all the country afflicted with grief;
your father, now an old man, mindful of his son, loving him moreover tenderly; 450. ’Surely this determination to leave your home, this is not according to duty; it is wrong, surely, to disregard father and mother,--we cannot speak of such a thing with propriety!
451. ’Gotamî, too, who has nourished you so long, fed you with milk when a helpless child, such love as hers cannot easily be forgotten; it is impossible surely to turn the back on a benefactor;
452. ’The highly gifted (virtuous) mother of a child, is ever respected by the most distinguished families; to inherit distinction and then to turn round, is not the mark of a distinguished man:
453. The illustrious child of Yasodharâ, who has inherited a kingdom, rightly governed, his years now gradually ripening, should not thus go away from and forsake his home; 454. But though he has gone away from his royal father, and forsaken his family and his kin,
forbid it he should still drive me away, let me not depart from the feet of my master; 455. ’My heart is bound to thee, as the heat is (bound up) in the boiling water;
I cannot return without thee to my country; to return and leave the prince thus, in the midst of the solitude of the desert, 456. ’Then should I be like Sumantra (Sumantra), who left and forsook Râma;
and now if I return alone to the palace, what words can I address to the king? 457. ’How can I reply to the reproaches of all the dwellers in the palace with suitable words?
Therefore let the prince rather tell me, how I may truly describe, 458. ’And with what device, the disfigured body, and the merit-seeking condition of the hermit!
I am full of fear and alarm, my tongue can utter no words; 459. ’Tell me then what words to speak; but who is there in the empire will believe me?
If I say that the moon’s rays are scorching, there are men, perhaps, who may believe me; 460. ’But they will not believe that the prince, in his conduct, will act without piety;
(for) the prince’s heart is sincere and refined, always actuated with pity and love to men. 461. ’To be deeply affected with love, and yet to forsake (the object of love), this surely is opposed to a constant mind. O then, for pity’s sake! return to your home, and thus appease my foolish longings.’
462. The prince having listened to Kandaka, pitying his grief expressed in so many words, with heart resolved and strong in its determination, spoke thus to him once more, and said:
463. ’Why thus on my account do you feel the pain of separation? you should overcome this sorrowful mood, it is for you to comfort yourself;
464. ’All creatures, each in its way, foolishly arguing that all things are constant, would influence me to-day not to forsake my kin and relatives; 465. ’But when dead and come to be a ghost, how then, let them say, can I be kept?
My loving mother when she bore me, with deep affection painfully carried me, 466. ’And then when born she died, not permitted to nourish me. One alive, the other dead, gone by different roads, where now shall she be found?
467. ’Like as in a wilderness on some high tree all the birds living with their mates assemble in the evening and at dawn disperse, so are the separations of the world;
468. ’The floating clouds rise (like) a high mountain, from the four quarters they fill the void, in a moment again they are separated and disappear; so is it with the habitations of men;
469. ’People from the beginning have erred thus, binding themselves in society and by the ties of love, and then, as after a dream, all is dispersed; do not then recount the names of my relatives;
470. ’For like the wood which is produced in spring, gradually grows and brings forth its leaves, which again fall in the autumn-chilly-dews--if the different parts of the same body are thus divided-- 471. ’How much more men who are united in society! and how shall the ties of relationship escape rending?
Cease therefore your grief and expostulation, obey my commands and return home; 472. ’The thought of your return alone will save me, and perhaps after your return I also may come back.
The men of Kapilavastu, hearing that my heart is fixed, 473. ’Will dismiss from their minds all thought of me, but you may make known my words,
"when I have escaped from the sad ocean of birth and death, then afterwards I will come back again; 474. ’"But I am resolved, if I obtain not my quest, my body shall perish in the mountain wilds."’
The white horse hearing the prince, as he uttered these true and earnest words, 475. ’Bent his knee and licked his foot, whilst he sighed deeply and wept. Then the prince with his soft and glossy palm, (fondly) stroking the head of the white, horse,
----------
476. (Said), ’Do not let sorrow rise (within), I grieve indeed at losing you, my gallant steed--so strong and active, your merit now has gained its end; 477. ’You shall enjoy for long a respite from an evil birth,
but for the present take as your reward these precious jewels and this glittering sword, and with them follow closely after Kandaka.’ 478. The prince then drawing forth his sword, glancing in the light as the dragon’s eye,
(cut off) the knot of hair with its jewelled stud, and forthwith cast it into space; 479. Ascending upwards to the firmament, it floated there as the wings of the phoenix
then all the Devas of the Trayastrimsa heavens seizing the hair, returned with it to their heavenly abodes; 480. Desiring always to adore the feet (offer religious service), how much rather now possessed of the crowning locks, with unfeigned piety do they increase their adoration, and shall do till the true law has died away.
481. Then the royal prince thought thus, ’My adornments now are gone for ever, there only now remain these silken garments, which are not in keeping with a hermit’s life.’
482. Then the Deva of the Pure abode, knowing the heart-ponderings of the prince, transformed himself into a hunter’s likeness, holding his bow, his arrows in his girdle, 483. His body girded with a Kashâya-colour’d robe, thus he advanced in front of the prince.
The prince considering this garment of his, the colour of the ground, a fitting pure attire, 484. Becoming to the utmost the person of a Rishi, not fit for a hunter’s dress, forthwith called to the hunter, as he stood before him, in accents soft, and thus addressed him: 485. ’That dress of thine belikes me much, as if it were not foul, and this my dress I’ll give thee in exchange, so please thee.’
486. The hunter then addressed the prince, Although I ill can spare (am not unattached to) this garment, which I use as a disguise among the deer, that alluring them within reach I may kill them, 487. ’Notwithstanding, as it so pleases you, I am now willing to bestow it in exchange for yours.’
The hunter having received the sumptuous dress, took again his heavenly body. 488. The prince and Kandaka, the coachman, seeing this, thought deeply thus,
’This garment is of no common character, it is not what a worldly man has worn;’ 489. And in (the prince’s) heart great joy arose, as he regarded the coat with double reverence,
and forthwith giving all the other things to Kandaka, he himself was clad in it, of Kashâya colour; 490. Then like the dark and lowering cloud, that surrounds the disc of the sun or moon,
he for a moment gazed, scanning his steps (way), then entered on the hermit’s grot; 491. Kandaka following him with (wistful) eyes, his body disappeared, nor was it seen again.
’My lord and master now has left his father’s house, his kinsfolk and myself (he cried), 492. ’He now has clothed himself in hermit’s garb, and entered the painful forest;’ raising his hands he called on Heaven, o’erpowered with grief he could not move; 493. Till holding by the white steed’s neck, he tottered forward on the homeward road,
turning again and often looking back, his steps (body) going on, his heart back-hastening, 494. Now lost in thought and self-forgetful, now looking down to earth, then raising up his drooping (eye) to heaven, falling at times and then rising again, thus weeping as he went, he pursued his way homewards.
----------
VARGA 7. ENTERING THE PLACE (WOOD) OF AUSTERITIES.
495. The prince having dismissed Kandaka, as he entered the Rishis’ abode, his graceful body brightly shining, lit up on every side the forest ’place of suffering;’ 496. Himself gifted with every excellence (Siddhârtha), according to his gifts, so were they reflected. As the lion, the king of beasts, when he enters among the herd of beasts,
497. Drives from their minds all thoughts of common things, as now they watch the true form of their kind, so those Rishi masters assembled there, suddenly perceiving the miraculous portent, 498. Were struck with awe and fearful gladness, as they gazed with earnest eyes and hands conjoined.
The men and women too, engaged in various occupations, beholding him, with unchanged attitudes, 499. Gazed as the gods look on king Sakra, with constant look and eyes unmoved; so the Rishis, with their feet fixed fast, looked at him even thus;
500. Whatever in their hands they held, without releasing it, they stopped and looked; even as the ox when yoked to the wain, his body bound, his mind also restrained; 501. So also the followers of the holy Rishis, each called the other to behold the miracle.
The peacocks and the other birds with cries commingled flapped their wings; 502. The Brahmakârins holding the rules of deer, following the deer wandering through mountain glades, (as the) deer coarse of nature, with flashing eyes [shen shih], regard (or see) the prince with fixed gaze; 503. So following the deer, those Brahmakârins intently gaze likewise,
looking at the exceeding glory of the Ikshvâku. As the glory of the rising sun 504. Is able to affect the herds of milch kine, so as to increase the quantity of their sweet-scented milk,
so those Brahmakârins, with wondrous joy, thus spoke one to the other: 505. ’Surely this is one of the eight Vasu Devas;’ others, ’this is one of the two Asvins;’ others, ’this is Mâra;’ others, ’this is one of the Brahmakâyikas;’ 506. Others, ’this is Sûryadeva or Kandradeva, coming down;
are they not seeking here a sacrifice which is their due? Come let us haste to offer our religious services!’ 507. The prince, on his part, with respectful mien addressed to them polite salutation.
Then Bodhisattva, looking with care in every direction on the Brahmakârins occupying the wood, 508. Each engaged in his religious duties, all desirous of the delights of heaven,
----------
----------
addressed the senior Brahmakârin, and asked him as to the path of true religion. 509. ’Now having but just come here, I do not yet know the rules of your religious life. I ask you therefore for information, and I pray explain to me what I ask.’
510. On this that twice-born (Brahman) in reply explained in succession all the modes of painful discipline, and the fruits expected as their result.
511. (How some ate) nothing brought from inhabited places (villages), (but) that produced from pure water, (others) edible roots and tender twigs, (others) fruits and flowers fit for food, 512. Each according to the rules of his sect, clothing and food in each case different,
some living amongst bird-kind, and like them capturing and eating food; 513. Others eating as the deer the grass (and herbs); others living like serpents, inhaling air;
others eating nothing pounded in wood or stone; some eating with two teeth, till a wound be formed; 514. Others, again, begging their food and giving it in charity, taking only the remnants for themselves;
others, again, who let water continually drip on their heads and those who offer up with fire; 515. Others who practise water-dwelling like fish; thus there are (he said) Brahmakârins of every sort,
who practise austerities, that they may at the end of life obtain a birth in heaven, 516. And by their present sufferings afterwards obtain peaceable fruit.
The lord of men, the excellent master, hearing all their modes of sorrow-producing penance, 517. Not perceiving any element of truth in them, experienced no joyful emotion in his heart; lost in thought, he regarded the men with pity, and with his heart in agreement his mouth thus spoke:
518. ’Pitiful indeed are such sufferings! and merely in quest of a human or heavenly reward, ever revolving in the cycle of birth or death, how great your sufferings, how small the recompence!
519. ’Leaving your friends, giving up honourable position; with a firm purpose to obtain the joys of heaven, although you may escape little sorrows, yet in the end involved in great sorrow;
520. ’Promoting the destruction of your outward form, and undergoing every kind of painful penance, and yet seeking to obtain another birth; increasing and prolonging the causes of the five desires, 521. ’Not considering that herefrom (result repeated) birth and death, undergoing suffering and, by that, seeking further suffering;
thus it is that the world of men, though dreading the approach of death, 522. ’Yet strive after renewed birth; and being thus born, they must die again. Altho’ still dreading (the power of) suffering, yet prolonging their stay in the sea of pain:
523. ’Disliking from their heart their present kind of life, yet still striving incessantly after other life; enduring affliction that they may partake of joy; seeking a birth in heaven, to suffer further trouble; 524. ’Seeking joys, whilst the heart sinks with feebleness. For this is so with those who oppose right reason;
they cannot but be cramped and poor at heart. But by earnestness and diligence, then we conquer. 525. ’Walking in the path of true wisdom, letting go both extremes, we then reach ultimate perfection;
to mortify the body, (if) this is religion, then to enjoy rest, is something not resulting from religion. 526. ’To walk religiously and afterwards to receive happiness, this is to make the fruit of religion something different from religion;
but bodily exercise is but the cause of death, strength results alone from the mind’s intention; 527. ’If you remove (from conduct) the purpose of the mind, the bodily act is but as rotten wood; wherefore, regulate the mind, and then the body will spontaneously go right.
528. ’(You say that) to eat pure things is a cause of religious merit, but the wild beasts and the children of poverty ever feed on these fruits and medicinal herbs; these then ought to gain much religious merit.
529. ’But if you say that the heart being good then bodily suffering is the cause of further merit, (then I ask) why may not those who walk (live) in ease, also possess a virtuous heart? 530. ’If joys are opposed to a virtuous heart, a virtuous heart may also be opposed to bodily suffering;
if, for instance, all those heretics profess purity because they use water (in various ways), 531. ’Then those who thus use water among men, even with a wicked mind (karma), yet ought ever to be pure.
But if righteousness is the groundwork of a Rishi’s purity, then the idea of a sacred spot as his dwelling, 532. ’Being the cause of his righteousness (is wrong). What is reverenced, should be known and seen. Reverence indeed is due to righteous conduct, but let it not redound to the place (or, mode of life).’
533. Thus speaking at large on religious questions, they went on till the setting sun. He then beheld their rites in connection with sacrifice to fire, the drilling (for sparks) and the fanning into flame, 534. Also the sprinkling of the butter libations, also the chanting of the mystic prayers, till the sun went down.
The prince considering these acts, 535. Could not perceive the right reason of them, and was now desirous to turn and go.
Then all those Brahmakârins came together to him to request him to stay; 536. Regarding with reverence the dignity of Bodhisattva, very desirous, they earnestly besought him:
’You have come from an irreligious place, to this wood where true religion flourishes, 537. ’And yet, now, you wish to go away; we beg you, then, on this account, to stay.’
All the old Brahmakârins, with their twisted hair and bark clothes, 538. Came following after Bodhisattva, asking him as a god to stay a little while.
Bodhisattva seeing these aged ones following him, their bodies worn with macerations, 539. Stood still and rested beneath a tree; and soothing them, urged them to return. Then all the Brahmakârins, young and old, surrounding him, made their request with joined hands:
540. ’You who have so unexpectedly arrived here, amid these garden glades so full of attraction, why now are you leaving them and going away, to seek perfection in the wilderness?
541. ’As a man loving (long) life, is unwilling to let go his body, so we are even thus; would that you would stop awhile.
542. ’This is a spot where Brahmans and Rishis have ever dwelt, royal Rishis and heavenly Rishis, these all have dwelt within these woods. The places on the borders of the snowy mountains, 543. ’Where men of high birth undergo their penance, those places are not to be compared to this.
All the body of learned masters from this place have reached heaven; 544. ’All the learned Rishis who have sought religious merit, have from this place and northwards (found it), those who have attained a knowledge of the true law, and gained divine wisdom come not from southwards;
545. ’If you indeed see us remiss and not earnest enough, practising rules not pure, and on that account are not pleased to stay, 546. ’Then we are the ones that ought to go; you can still remain and dwell here,
all these different Brahmakârins ever desire to find companions in their penances. 547. ’And you, because you are conspicuous for your religious earnestness, should not so quickly cast away their society: if you can remain here, they will honour you as god Sakra, 548. ’Yea! as the Devas pay worship to Brihaspati (or, Virudhakapati).’
Then Bodhisattva answered the Brahmakârins and told them what his desires were: 549. ’I am seeking for a true method of escape, I desire solely to destroy all mundane influences;
but you, with strong hearts, practise your rules as ascetics, 550. ’And pay respectful attention to such visitors as may come. My heart indeed is moved with affection towards you,
for pleasant conversation is agreeable to all, those who listen are affected thereby; 551. ’And so hearing your words, my mind is strengthened in religious feeling;
you indeed have all paid me much respect, in agreement with the courtesy of your religious profession; 552. ’But now I am constrained to depart, my heart grieves thereat exceedingly,
first of all, having left my own kindred, and now about to be separated from you. 553. ’The pain of separation from associates, this pain is as great as the other, it is impossible for my mind not to grieve, as it is not to see others’ faults.
554. ’But you, by suffering pain, desire earnestly to obtain the joys of birth in heaven; whilst I desire to escape from the three worlds, and therefore I give up what my reason (mind) tells me must be ejected. 555. ’The law which you practise, you inherit from the deeds of former teachers, but I, desiring to destroy all combination (accumulation), seek a law which admits of no such accident. 556. ’And therefore I cannot in this grove delay for a longer while in fruitless discussions.’
At this time all the Brahmakârins, hearing the words spoken by Bodhisattva, 557. Words full of right reason and truth, very excellent in the distinction of principles, their hearts rejoiced and exulted greatly, and deep feelings of reverence were excited within them.
558. At this time there was one Brahmakârin, who always slept in the dust, with tangled hair and raiment of the bark of trees, his eyes bleared (yellow), preparing himself in an ascetic practice (called) ’high-nose.’
559. This one addressed Bodhisattva in the following words: ’Strong in will! bright in wisdom! firmly fixed in resolve to escape (pass beyond) the limits of birth, knowing that in escape from birth there alone is rest, 560. ’Not affected by any desire after heavenly blessedness, the mind set upon, the eternal destruction of the body (bodily form), you are indeed miraculous in appearance, (as you are) alone in the possession of such a mind. 561. ’To sacrifice to the gods, and to practise every kind of austerity, all this is designed to secure a birth in heaven, but here there is no mortification of selfish desire, 562. ’There is still a selfish personal aim; but to bend the will to seek final escape, this is indeed the work of a true teacher, this is the aim of an enlightened master;
563. ’This place is no right halting-place for you, you ought to proceed to Mount Pinda (Pândava), there dwells a great Muni, whose name is A-lo-lam (Arâda Râma).
564. ’He only has reached the end (of religious aims), the most excellent eye (of the law). Go therefore to the place where he dwells, and listen there to the true exposition of the law.
565. ’This will make your heart rejoice, as you learn to follow the precepts of his system. As for me, beholding the joy of your resolve, and fearing that I shall not obtain rest,  566. ’I must once more let go (dismiss) those following me, and seek other disciples;
straighten my head (nose) and gaze with my full eyes; anoint my lips and cleanse my teeth, 567. ’Cover my shoulders and make bright my face, smooth my tongue and make it pliable. Thus, O excellently marked, sir! fully drinking (at the fountain of) the water you give (glorious water),
568. ’I shall escape from the unfathomable depths. In the world nought is comparable to this, that which old men and Rishis have not known, that shall (I) know and obtain:
569. Bodhisattva having listened to these words, left the company of the Rishis, whilst they all, turning round him to the right, returned to their place.
----------
VARGA 8. THE GENERAL GRIEF OF THE PALACE.
570. Kandaka leading back the horse, opening the way for his heart’s sorrow, as he went on, lamented and wept: unable to disburthen his soul.
571. First of all with the royal prince, passing along the road for one night, but now dismissed and ordered to return. As the darkness of night closed on him, 572. Irresolute he wavered in mind. On the eighth day approaching the city,
the noble horse pressed onwards, exhibiting all his qualities of speed; 573. But yet hesitating as he looked around and beheld not the form of the royal prince;
his four members bent down with toil, his head and neck deprived of their glossy look, 574. Whinnying as he went on with grief, he refused night and day his grass and water,
because he had lost his lord, the deliverer of men. Returning thus to Kapilavastu, 575. The whole country appeared withered and bare, as when one comes back to a deserted village; or as when the sun hidden behind Sumeru causes darkness to spread over the world.
576. The fountains of water sparkled no more, the flowers and fruits were withered and dead, the men and women in the streets seemed lost in grief and dismay.
577. Thus Kandaka with the white horse went on sadly and with slow advance, silent to those enquiring, wearily progressing as when accompanying a funeral;
578. So they went on, whilst all the spectators seeing Kandaka, but not observing the royal Sâkya prince, raised piteous cries of lamentation and wept; as when the charioteer returned without Râma.
579. Then one by the side of the road, with his body bent, called out to Kandaka: ’The prince, beloved of the world, the defender of his people, 580. ’The one you have taken away by stealth, where dwells he now?’
Kandaka, then, with sorrowful heart, replied to the people and said: 581. ’I with loving purpose followed after him whom I loved; ’tis not I who have deserted the prince, but by him have I been sent away; (by him) who now has given up his ordinary adornments, 582. ’And with shaven head and religious garb, has entered the sorrow-giving grove.’
Then the men hearing that he had become an ascetic, were oppressed with thoughts of wondrous boding (unusual thoughts); 583. They sighed with heaviness and wept, and as their tears coursed down their cheeks,
they spake thus one to the other: ’What then shall we do (by way of expedient)?’ 584. Then they all exclaimed at once, ’Let us haste after him in pursuit; for as when a man’s bodily functions fail, his frame dies and his spirit flees,
585. ’So is the prince our life, and he our life gone, how shall we survive? This city, perfected with slopes and woods; those woods, that cover the slopes of the city, 586. ’All deprived of grace, ye lie as Bharata when killed!’
Then the men and women within the town, vainly supposing the prince had come back, 587. In haste rushed out to the heads of the way, and seeing the horse returning alone, not knowing whether he (the prince) was safe or lost, began to weep and to raise every piteous sound;
588. (And said, ’Behold!) Kandaka advancing slowly with the horse, comes back with sighs and tears; surely he grieves because the prince is lost.’ And thus sorrow is added to sorrow! 589. Then like a captive warrior is drawn before the king his master,
so did he enter the gates with tears, his eyes filled so that he said nought. 590. Then looking up to heaven he loudly groaned; and the white horse too whined piteously;
then all the varied birds and beasts in the palace court, and all the horses within the stables, 591. Hearing the sad whinnying of the royal steed, replied in answer to him, thinking ’now the prince has come back.’ But seeing him not, they ceased their cries!
592. And now the women of the after-palace, (hearing the cries of the horses, birds, and beasts,) their hair dishevelled, their faces wan and yellow, their forms sickly to look at, their mouths and lips parched, 593. Their garments torn and unwashed, the soil and heat not cleansed from their bodies,
----------
----------
their ornaments all thrown aside, disconsolate and sad, cheerless in face, 594. Raised their bodies, without any grace, even as the feeble (little) morning star (or stars of morning); their garments torn and knotted, soiled like the appearance of a robber,
----------
595. Seeing Kandaka and the royal horse shedding tears instead of the hoped-for return, they all, assembled thus, uttered their cry, even as those who weep for one beloved just dead; 596. Confused and wildly they rushed about, as a herd of oxen that have lost their way.
Mahâpragâpati Gôtamî, hearing that the prince had not returned, 597. Fell fainting on the ground, her limbs entirely deprived of strength, even as some mad tornado wind crushes the golden-colour’d plantain tree; 598. And again, hearing that her son had become a recluse, deeply sighing and with increased sadness she thought, ’Alas! those glossy locks turning to the right, each hair produced from each orifice, 599. ’Dark and pure, gracefully shining, sweeping the earth when loose, or when so determined, bound together in a heavenly crown, and now shorn and lying in the grass! 600. ’Those rounded shoulders and that lion step! Those eyes broad as the ox-king’s, that body shining bright as yellow gold; that square breast and Brahma voice; 601. ’That you! possessing all these excellent qualities, should have entered on the sorrow-giving forest; what fortune now remains for the world, losing thus the holy king of earth? 602. ’That those delicate and pliant feet, pure as the lily and of the same colour, should now be torn by stones and thorns; O how can such feet tread on such ground! 603. ’Born and nourished in the guarded palace, clad with garments of the finest texture, washed in richly-scented water, anointed with the choicest perfumes, 604. ’And now exposed to chilling blasts and dews of night, O! where during the heat or the chilly morn can rest be found! Thou flower of all thy race! Confessed by all the most renowned! 605. ’Thy virtuous qualities everywhere talked of and exalted, ever reverenced, without self-seeking! why hast thou unexpectedly brought thyself upon some morn to beg thy food for life! 606. ’Thou who wert wont to repose upon a soft and kingly couch, and indulge in every pleasure during thy waking hours, how canst thou now endure the mountain and the forest wilds, on the bare grass to make thyself a resting-place!’ 607. Thus thinking of her son--her heart was full of sorrow, disconsolate she lay upon the earth. The waiting women raised her up, and dried the tears from off her face,
608. Whilst all the other courtly ladies, overpowered with grief, their limbs relaxed, their minds bound fast with woe, unmoved they sat like pictured-folk.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
609. And now Yasodharâ deeply chiding, spoke thus to Kandaka: ’Where now dwells he, who ever dwells within my mind? 610. ’You two went forth, the horse a third, but now two only have returned!
My heart is utterly o’er-borne with grief, filled with anxious thoughts, it cannot rest. 611. ’And you deceitful man! Untrustworthy and false associate!
evil contriver! plainly revealed a traitor, a smile lurks underneath thy tears! 612. ’Escorting him in going; returning now with wails!
Not one at heart--but in league against him--openly constituted a friend and well-wisher, concealing underneath a treacherous purpose; 613. ’So thou hast caused the sacred prince to go forth once and not return again!
No questioning the joy you feel! Having done ill you now enjoy the fruit; 614. ’Better far to dwell with an enemy of wisdom, than work with one who, while a fool, professes friendship.
Openly professing sweetness and light, inwardly a scheming and destructive enemy. 615. ’And now this royal and kingly house, in one short morn is crushed and ruined! All these fair and queen-like women, with grief o’erwhelmed, their beauty marred, 616. ’Their breathing choked with tears and sobs, their faces soiled with crossing tracks of grief! Even the queen (Mâyâ) when in life, resting herself on him, as the great snowy mountains 617. ’Repose upon the widening earth, through grief in thought of What would happen, died.
How sad the lot of these--within these open lattices--these weeping ones, these deeply wailing! 618. ’Born in another state than hers in heaven, how can their grief be borne!’
Then speaking to the horse she said, ’Thou unjust! what dullness this--to carry off a man, 619. ’As in the darkness some wicked thief bears off a precious gem.
When riding thee in time of battle, swords, and javelins and arrows, 620. ’None of these alarmed or frighted thee! But now what fitfulness of temper this, to carry off by violence, to rob my soul of one, the choicest jewel of his tribe. 621. ’O! thou art but a vicious reptile, to do such wickedness as this!
to-day thy woeful lamentation sounds everywhere within these palace walls, 622. ’But when you stole away my cherished one, why wert thou dumb and silent then!
if then thy voice had sounded loud, and roused the palace inmates from their sleep, 623. ’If then they had awoke and slumbered not, there would not have ensued the present sorrow.’
Kandaka, hearing these sorrowful words, drawing in his breath and composing himself, 624. Wiping away his tears, with hands clasped together, answered: ’Listen to me, I pray, in self-justification--
be not suspicious of, nor blame the royal horse, nor be thou angry with me either. 625. ’For in truth, no fault has been committed (by us). It is the gods who have effected this.
For I, indeed, extremely reverenced the king’s command, it was the gods who drove him to the solitudes, 626. ’Urgently leading on the horse with him: thus they went together fleet as with wings, his breathing hushed! suppressed was every sound, his feet scarce touched the earth!
----------
627. ’The city gates wide opening of themselves! all space self-lighted! this was the work indeed of the gods; and what was I, or what my strength, compared with theirs?’
----------
----------
----------
628. Yasodharâ hearing these words, her heart was lost in deep consideration! the deeds accomplished by the gods could not be laid to others’ charge, as faults;
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
629. And so she ceased her angry chiding, and allowed her great, consuming grief to smoulder. Thus prostrate on the ground she muttered out her sad complaints, ’That the two ringed-birds (doves) should be divided!
630. ’Now,’ she cried, ’my stay and my support is lost, between those once agreed in life (religious life), separation has sprung up! those who were at one (as to religion) are now divided, (let go their common action)! where shall I seek another mode of (religious) life?
631. ’In olden days the former conquerors (Ginas?) greatly rejoiced to see their kingly retinue; these with their wives in company, in search of highest wisdom, roamed through groves and plains. 632. ’And now, that he should have deserted me! and what is the religious state he seeks!
the Brahman ritual respecting sacrifice, requires the wife to take part in the offering, 633. ’And because they both share in the service they shall both receive a common reward hereafter! but you (O prince!) art niggard in your religious rites, driving me away, and wandering forth alone!
634. ’Is it that you saw me jealous, and so turned against me! that you now seek some one free from jealousy! or did you see some other cause to hate me, that you now seek to find a heaven-born nymph!
635. ’But why should one excelling in every personal grace seek to practise self-denying austerities! is it that you despise a common lot with me, that variance rises in your breast against your wife!
----------
636. ’Why does not Rahula fondly repose upon your knee. Alas! alas! unlucky master! full of grace without, but hard (diamond) at heart!
637. ’The glory and the pride of all your tribe, yet hating those who reverence you! O! can it be, you have turned your back for good (upon) your little child, scarce able yet to smile!
638. ’My heart is gone! and all my strength! my lord has fled, to wander in the mountains! he cannot surely thus forget me! he is then but a man of wood or stone.’
639. Thus having spoken, her mind was dulled and darkened, she muttered on, or spoke in wild mad words, or fancied that she saw strange sights, and sobbing past the power of self-restraint, 640. Her breath grew less, and sinking thus, she fell asleep upon the dusty ground!
The palace ladies seeing this, were wrung with heartfelt sorrow, 641. Just as the full-blown lily, struck by the wind and hail, is broken down and withered.
And now the king, his father, having lost the prince, was filled, both night and day, with grief; 642. And fasting, sought the gods (for help). He prayed that they would soon restore him, and having prayed and finished sacrifice, he went from out the sacred gates; 643. Then hearing all the cries and sounds of mourning, his mind distressed became confused, as when heaven’s thundering and lightning put to bewildering flight a herd of elephants.
644. Then seeing Kandaka with the royal steed, after long questioning, finding his son a hermit, fainting he fell upon the earth, as when the flag of Indra falls and breaks.
645. Then all the ministers of state, upraising him, exhort him, as was right, to calm himself. After a while, his mind somewhat recovered, speaking to the royal steed, he said:
646. ’How often have I ridden thee to battle, and every time have thought upon (commended) your excellence! but now I hate and loathe thee, more than ever I have loved or praised thee!
647. ’My son, renowned for noble qualities, thou hast carried off and taken from me; and left him ’mid the mountain forests; and now you have come back alone;
648. ’Take me, then, quickly hence and go! And going, never more come back with me! For since you have not brought him back, my life is worth no more preserving; 649. ’No longer care I about governing! My son about me was my only joy;
as the Brahman Gayanta met death for his son’s sake, 650. ’So I, deprived of my religious son, will of myself deprive myself of life. So Manu, lord of all that lives, ever lamented for his son; 651. ’How much more I, a mortal man (ever-man), deprived of mine, must lose all rest!
In old time the king Aga, loving his son, wandering thro’ the mountains, 652. ’Lost in thought (or deeply affected), ended life, and forthwith was born in heaven.
And now I cannot die! Thro’ the long night fixed in this sad state, 653. ’With this great palace round me, thinking of my son, solitary and athirst as any hungry spirit (Preta); as one who, thirsty, holding water in his hand, but when he tries to drink lets all escape, 654. ’And so remains athirst till death ensues, and after death becomes a wandering ghost; --so I, in the extremity of thirst, through loss, possessed once of a son, but now without a son, 655. ’Still live, and cannot end my days! But come! tell me at once where is my son! let me not die athirst (for want of knowing this) and fall among the Pretas. 656. ’In former days, at least, my will was strong and firm, difficult to move as the great earth; but now I’ve lost my son, my mind is dazed, as in old time the king "ten chariots."’
657. And now the royal teacher (Purohita), an illustrious sage, with the chief minister, famed for wisdom, with earnest and considerate minds, both exhorted with remonstrances, the king.
658. ’Pray you (they said) arouse yourself to thought, and let not grief cramp and hold your mind! in olden days there were mighty kings, who left their country, as flowers are scattered;
659. ’Your son now practises the way of wisdom; why then nurse (increase) your grief and misery; you should recall the prophecy of Asita, and reasonably count on what was probable!
660. ’(Think of) the heavenly joys which you, a universal king, have inherited! But now, so troubled and constrained in mind, how will it not be said, "The Lord of earth can change his golden-jewel-heart!"
661. ’Now, therefore, send us forth, arid bid us seek the place he occupies, then by some stratagem and strong remonstrances, and showing him our earnestness of purpose, 662. ’We will break down his resolution, and thus assuage your kingly sorrow.’
The king, with joy, replied and said: ’Would that you both would go in haste, 663. ’As swiftly as the Saketa bird flies through the void for her young’s sake; thinking of nought but the royal prince, and sad at heart--I shall await your search!’
664. The two men having received their orders, the king retired among his kinsfolk, his heart somewhat more tranquillised, and breathing freely through his throat.
----------
VARGA 9. THE MISSION TO SEEK THE PRINCE.
665. The king now suppressing (regulating) his grief, urged an his great teacher and chief minister, as one urges on with whip a ready horse, to hasten onwards as the rapid stream; 666. Whilst they fatigued, yet with unflagging effort, come to the place of the sorrow-giving grove;
then laying on one side the five outward marks of dignity and regulating well their outward gestures, 667. They entered the Brahmans’ quiet hermitage, and paid reverence to the Rishis. They, on their part, begged them to be seated, and repeated the law for their peace and comfort.
668. Then forthwith they addressed the Rishis and said: ’We have on our minds a subject on which we would ask (for advice). There is one who is called Suddhodana râga, a descendant of the famous Ikshvâku family, 669. ’We are his teacher and his minister, who instruct him in the sacred books as required.
----------
The king indeed is like Indra (for dignity); his son, like Ke-yan-to (Gayanta), 670. ’In order to escape old age, disease, and death, has become a hermit, and depends on this; on his account have we come hither, with a view to let your worships know of this.’
671. Replying, they said: ’With respect to this youth,. has he long arms and the signs of a great man? Surely he is the one who, enquiring into our practice, discoursed so freely on the matter of life and death. 672. ’He has gone to the abode of Arâda, to seek for a complete mode of escape.’
Having received this certain information, respectfully considering the urgent commands of the anxious king, 673. They dared not hesitate in their undertaking, but straightway took the road and hastened on. Then seeing the wood in which the royal prince dwelt, and him, deprived of all outward marks of dignity, 674. His body still glorious with lustrous shining, as when the sun comes forth from the black cloud;
then the religious teacher of the country and the great minister holding to the true law, 675. Put off from them their courtly dress, and descending from the chariot gradually advanced,
like the royal Po-ma-ti (? Bharata) and the Rishi Vasishtha, 676. Went through the woods and forests, and seeing the royal prince Râma, each according to his own prescribed manner, paid him reverence, as he advanced to salute him;
677. Or as Sukra, in company with Aṅgiras, with earnest heart paid reverence, and sacrificed to Indra râga.
678. Then the royal prince in return paid reverence to the . royal teacher and the great minister, as the divine Indra placed at their ease Sukra and Aṅgiras; 679. Then, at his command, the two men seated themselves before the prince, as Pou-na (Punarvasû) and Pushya, the twin stars attend beside the moon;
680. Then the Purohita and the great minister respectfully explained to the royal prince, even as Pi-li-po-ti (Brihaspati) spoke to that Gayanta:
681. ’Your royal father, thinking of the prince, is pierced in heart, as with an iron point; his mind distracted, raves in solitude; he sleeps upon the dusty ground; 682. ’By night and day he adds to his sorrowful reflections; his tears flow down like the incessant rain;
and now to seek you out, he has sent us hither. Would that you would listen with attentive mind; 683. ’We know that you delight to act religiously; it is certain, then, without a doubt,
this is not the time for you to be a hermit (to enter the forest wilds); a feeling of deep pity consumes our heart! 684. ’You, if you be indeed, moved by religion, ought to feel some pity for our case; let your kindly feelings flow abroad, to comfort us who are worn at heart; 685. ’Let not the tide of sorrow and of sadness completely overwhelm the outlets of our heart;
as the torrents (which roll down) the grassy mountains; or the calamities of tempest, fiery heat, and lightning; 686. ’For so the grieving heart has these four sorrows, turmoil and drought; passion and overthrow.
But come! return to your native place, the time will arrive when you can go forth again as a recluse. 687. ’But now to disregard your family duties, to turn against father and mother, how can this be called love and affection? that love which overshadows and embraces all.
688. ’Religion requires not the wild solitudes; you can practise a hermit’s duties in your home; studiously thoughtful, diligent in expedients, this is to lead a hermit’s life in truth.
689. A shaven head, and garments soiled with dirt,--to wander by yourself through desert wilds,--this is but to encourage constant fears, and cannot be rightly called "an awakened hermit’s (life)." 690. ’Would rather we might take you by the hand, and sprinklewater on your head, and crown you with a heavenly diadem, and place you underneath a flowery canopy, 691. ’That all eyes might gaze with eagerness upon you; after this, in truth, we would leave our home with joy.
The former kings Teou-lau-ma (Druma?), A-neou-ke-o-sa (Anugasa or Anudâsa), 692. ’Po-ke-lo-po-yau (Vagrabâhu), Pi-po-to-’an-ti (Vaibhrâga), Pi-ti-o-ke-na (Vatâgana?), Na-lo-sha-po-lo (Narasavara?),
693. ’All these several kings refused not the royal crown, the jewels, and the ornaments of person; their hands and feet were adorned with gems, 694. ’Around them were women to delight and please, these things they cast not from them, for the sake of escape;
you then may also come back home, and undertake both necessary duties; 695. ’Your mind prepare itself in higher law, whilst for the sake of earth you wield the sceptre;
let there be no more weeping, but comply with what we say, and let us publish it; 696. ’And having published it with your authority, then you may return and receive respectful welcome.
Your father and your mother, for your sake, in grief shed tears like the great ocean; 697. ’Having no stay and no dependence now--no source from which the Sâkya stem may grow--you ought, like the captain of the ship, to bring it safely across to a place of safety.
698. ’The royal prince Pi-san-ma, as also Lo-me-po-ti, they respectfully attended to the command of their father, you also should do the same!
699. ’Your loving mother who cherished you so kindly, with no regard for self, through years of care, as the cow deprived of her calf, weeps and laments, forgetting to eat or sleep;
700. ’You surely ought to return to her at once, to protect her life from evil; as a solitary bird, away from its fellows, or as the lonely elephant, wandering through the jungle, 701. ’Losing the care of their young, ever think of protecting and defending them,
so you the only child, young and defenceless, not knowing what you do, bring trouble and solicitude; 702. ’Cause, then, this sorrow to dissipate itself; as one who rescues the moon from being devoured,
so do you reassure the men and women of the land, and remove from them the consuming grief, 703. ’(And suppress) the sighs that rise like breath to heaven, which cause the darkness that obscures their sight; seeking you, as water, to quench the fire, the fire quenched, their eyes shall open.’
704. Bodhisattva, hearing of his father the king, experienced the greatest distress of mind, and sitting still, gave himself to reflection; and then, in due course, replied respectfully:
705. ’I know indeed that my royal father is possessed of a loving and deeply considerate mind, but my fear of birth, old age, disease, and death has led me to disobey, and disregard his extreme kindness.
706. ’Whoever neglects right consideration about his present life, and because he hopes to escape in the end, therefore disregards all precautions (in the present), on this man comes the inevitable doom of death. 707. ’It is the knowledge of this, therefore, that weighs with me, and after long delay has constrained me to a hermit’s life;
hearing of my father, the king, and his grief, my heart is affected with increased love; 708. But yet, all is like the fancy of a dream, quickly reverting to nothingness.
Know then, without fear of contradiction, that the nature of existing things is not uniform; 709. ’The cause of sorrow is not necessarily the relationship of child with parent, but that which produces the pain of separation, results from the influence of delusion;
710. ’As men going along a road suddenly meet mid-way with others, and then a moment more are separated, each one going his own way,
711. ’So by the force of concomitance, relationships are framed, and then, according to each one’s destiny, there is separation; he who thoroughly investigates this false connection of relationship ought not to cherish in himself grief; 712. ’In this world there is rupture of family love, in another life (world) it is sought for again; brought together for a moment, again rudely divided, everywhere the fetters of kindred are formed! 713. ’Ever being bound, and ever being loosened! who can sufficiently lament such constant separations;
born into the world, and then gradually changing, constantly separated by death and then born again. 714. ’All things which exist in time must perish, the forests and mountains all things thus exist;
in time are born all sensuous things (things possessing the five desires), so is it both with worldly substance and with time. 715. ’Because, then, death pervades all time, get rid of death, and time will disappear.
You desire to make me king, and it is difficult to resist the offices of love; 716. ’But as a disease (is difficult to bear) without medicine, so neither can I bear (this weight of dignity); in every condition, high or low, we find folly and ignorance, (and men) carelessly following the dictates of lustful passion;
717. ’At last, we come to live in constant fear; thinking anxiously of the outward form, the spirit droops; following the ways of men , the mind resists the right; but, the conduct of the wise is not so.
718. ’The sumptuously ornamented and splendid palace (I look upon) as filled with fire; the hundred dainty dishes (tastes) of the divine kitchen, as mingled with destructive poisons; 719. ’The lily growing on the tranquil lake, in its midst harbours countless noisome insects;
and so the towering abode of the rich is the house of calamity; the wise will not dwell therein. 720. ’In former times illustrious kings, seeing the many crimes of their home and country, affecting as with poison the dwellers therein, in sorrowful disgust sought comfort in seclusion;
721. ’We know, therefore, that the troubles of a royal estate are not to be compared with the repose of a religious life; far better dwell in the wild mountains, and eat the herbs like the beasts of the field; 722. ’Therefore I dare not dwell in the wide palace, for the black snake has its dwelling there.
I reject the kingly estate and the five desires [desires of the senses], to escape such sorrows I wander thro’ the mountain wilds. 723. ’This, then, would be the consequence of compliance, that I; who, delighting in religion, am gradually getting wisdom, should now quit these quiet woods, and returning home, partake of sensual pleasures, 724. ’And thus by night and day increase my store of misery. Surely this is not what should be done!
that the great leader of an illustrious tribe, having left his home from love of religion, 725. ’And for ever turned his back upon tribal honour, desiring to confirm his purpose as a leader,--that he,--discarding outward form, clad in religious garb, loving religious meditation, wandering thro’ the wilds,--
726. ’Should now reject his hermit vestment, tread down his sense of proper shame (and give up his aim). This, though I gained heaven’s kingly state, cannot be done! how much less to gain an earthly, though distinguished, home! 727. ’For having spued forth lust, passion, and ignorance, shall I return to feed upon it? as a man might go back to his vomit! such misery, how could I bear?
728. ’Like a man whose house has caught fire, by some expedient finds a way to escape, will such a man forthwith go back and enter it again? such conduct would disgrace a man! 729. ’So I, beholding the evils, birth, old age, and death, to escape the misery, have become a hermit; shall I then go back and enter in, and like a fool dwell in their company? 730. ’He who enjoys a royal estate and yet seeks rescue, cannot dwell thus, this is no place for him; escape (rescue) is born from quietness and rest; to be a king is to add distress and poison;
731. ’To seek for rest and yet aspire to royal condition is but a contradiction, royalty and rescue, motion and rest, like fire and water, having two principles, cannot be united.
732. ’So one resolved to seek escape cannot abide possessed of kingly dignity! and if you say a man may be a king, and at the same time prepare deliverance for himself, 733. ’There is no certainty in this! to seek certain escape is not to risk it thus;
it is through this uncertain frame of mind that once a man gone forth is led to go back home again; 734. ’But I, my mind is not uncertain; severing the baited hook of relationship, with straightforward purpose, I have left my home. Then tell me, why should I return again?’
----------
735. The great minister, inwardly reflecting, (thought), ’The mind of the royal prince, my master, is full of wisdom, and agreeable to virtue, what he says is reasonable and fitly framed.’ 736. Then he addressed the prince and said: ’According to what your highness states,
he who seeks religion must seek it rightly; but this is not the fitting time (for you); 737. ’Your royal father, old and of declining years, thinking of you his son, adds grief to grief;
you say indeed, "I find my joy in rescue. To go back would be apostacy." 738. ’But yet your joy denotes unwisdom, and argues want of deep reflection; you do not see, because you seek the fruit, how vain to give up present duty.
739. ’There are some who say, There is "hereafter;" others there are who say, "Nothing hereafter." So whilst this question hangs in suspense, why should a man give up his present pleasure?
740. ’If perchance there is "hereafter," we ought to bear (patiently) what it brings; if you say, "Hereafter is not," then there is not either rescue (salvation)!
741. ’If you say, "Hereafter is," you would not say, "Salvation causes it." As earth is hard, or fire is hot, or water moist, or wind is mobile, 742. ’"Hereafter" is just so. It has its own distinct nature.
So when we speak of pure and impure, each comes from its own distinctive nature. 743. ’If you should say, "By some contrivance this can be removed," such an opinion argues folly.
Every root within the moral world (world or domain of conduct) has its own nature predetermined; 744. ’Loving remembrance and forgetfulness, these have their nature fixed and positive;
so likewise age, disease, and death, these sorrows, who can escape by strategy? (contrivance, upâya). 745. ’If you say, "Water can put out fire," or "Fire can cause water to boil and pass away," (then this proves only that) distinctive natures may be mutually destructive; but nature in harmony produces living things;
746. ’So man when first conceived within the womb, his hands, his feet, and all his separate members, his spirit and his understanding, of themselves are perfected; but who is he who does it?
747. ’Who is he that points the prickly thorn? This too is nature, self-controlling. And take again the different kinds of beasts, these are what they are, without desire (on their part);
748. ’And so, again, the heaven-born beings, whom the self-existent (Isvara) rules, and all the world of his creation; these have no self-possessed power of expedients; 749. ’For if they had a means of causing birth, there would be also (means) for controlling death, and then what need of self-contrivance, or seeking for deliverance?
750. ’There are those who say, "I" (the soul) is the cause of birth, and others who affirm, "I" (the soul) is the cause of death. There are some who say, "Birth comes from nothingness, and without any plan of ours we perish:"
751. ’Thus one is born a fortunate child, removed from poverty, of noble family, or learned in testamentary lore of Rishis, or called to offer mighty sacrifices to the gods, 752. ’Born in either state, untouched by poverty, then their famous name becomes to them "escape,"
their virtues handed down by name to us; yet if these attained their happiness (found deliverance), 753. ’Without contrivance of their own, how vain and fruitless is the toil of those who seek "escape."
And you, desirous of deliverance, purpose to practise some high expedient, 754. ’Whilst your royal father frets and sighs; for a short while you have assayed the road,
and leaving home have wandered thro’ the wilds, to return then would not now be wrong; 755. ’Of old, king Ambarîsha for a long while dwelt in the grievous forest, leaving his retinue and all his kinsfolk, but afterwards returned and took the royal office;
756. ’And so Râma, son of the king of the country, leaving his country occupied the mountains, but hearing he was acting contrary to usage, returned and governed righteously.
757. ’And so the king of Sha-lo-po, called To-lo-ma (Druma), father and son, both wandered forth as hermits, but in the end came back again together;
758. ’So Po-’sz-tsau Muni (Vasishtha?), with On-tai-tieh (Âtreya?), in the wild mountains practising as Brahmakârins, these too returned to their own country. 759. ’Thus all these worthies of a by-gone age, famous for their advance in true religion, came back home and royally governed, as lamps enlightening the world. 760. ’Wherefore for you to leave the mountain wilds, religiously to rule, is not a crime.’
The royal prince, listening to the great minister, loving words without excess of speaking, 761. Full of sound argument, clear and unconfused, with no desire to wrangle after the way of the schools, with fixed purpose, deliberately speaking, thus answered the great minister:
762. ’The question of being and not-being is an idle one, only adding to the uncertainty of an unstable mind, and to talk of such matters I have no strong (fixed) inclination; 763. ’Purity of life, wisdom, the practice of asceticism, these are matters to which I earnestly apply myself,
the world is full of empty studies (discoveries) which our teachers in their office skilfully involve; 764. ’But they are without any true principle, and I will none of them!
The enlightened man distinguishes truth from falsehood; but how can truth (faith) be born from such as those? 765. ’For they are like the man born blind, leading the blind man as a guide; as in the night, as in thick darkness [both wander on], what recovery is there for them?
766. Regarding the question of the pure and impure, the world involved in self-engendered doubt cannot perceive the truth; better to walk along the way of purity, 767. Or rather follow the pure law of self-denial, hate the practice of impurity,
reflect on what was said of old, not obstinate in one belief or one tradition, 768. ’With sincere (empty) mind, accepting all true words, and ever banishing sinful sorrow (i.e. sin, the cause of grief). Words which exceed sincerity (simplicity of purpose) are vainly (falsely) spoken; the wise man uses not such words.
769. As to what you say of Râma and the rest, leaving their home, practising a pure life, and then returning to their country, and once more mixing themselves in sensual pleasures, 770. ’Such men as these walk vainly; those who are wise place no dependence on them.
Now, for your sakes, permit me, briefly, to recount this one true principle (i.e. purpose) (of action): 771. "The sun, the moon may fall to earth, Sumeru and all the snowy mountains overturn, but I will never change my purpose; rather than enter a forbidden place, 772. ’"Let me be cast into the fierce fire; not to accomplish rightly (what I have entered on), and to return once more to my own land, there to enter the fire of the five desires, 773. ’"Let it befall me as my own oath records:"--so spake the prince, his arguments as pointed as the brightness of the perfect sun;
then rising up he passed some distance off.’ 774. The Purohita and the minister, their words and discourse prevailing nothing,
conversed together, after which, resolving to depart on their return, 775. With great respect they quietly inform the prince, not daring to intrude their presence on him further;
and yet regarding the king’s commands, not willing to return with unbecoming haste, 776. They loitered quietly along the way, and whomsoever they encountered, selecting those who seemed like wise men, they interchanged such thoughts as move the learned, Hiding their true position, as men of title; then passing on, they speeded on their way.
----------
KIOUEN III. VARGA 10. BIMBASÂRA RÂGA INVITES THE PRINCE.
777. The royal prince departing from the court-master (i.e. the Purohita) and the great minister, Saddharma, keeping along the stream, then crossing the Ganges, he took the road towards the Vulture Peak,
778. Hidden among the five mountains, standing alone a lovely peak as a roof amid (the others). The trees and shrubs and flowers in bloom, the flowing fountains, and the cooling rills, 779. (All these he gazed upon)--then passing on, he entered the city of the five peaks, calm and peaceful, as one come down from heaven.
The country folk, seeing the royal prince, his comeliness and his excessive grace, 780. Though young in years, yet glorious in his person, incomparable as the appearance of a great master, seeing him thus, strange thoughts affected them, as if they gazed upon the banner (curtain) of Isvara.
781. They stayed the foot, who passed athwart the path; those hastened on, who were behind.; those going before, turned back their heads and gazed with earnest, wistful look.
782. The marks and distinguishing points of his person, on these they fixed their eyes without fatigue, and then approached with reverent homage, joining both their hands in salutation:
783. With all there was a sense of wondrous joy, as in their several ways they offered what they had, looking at his noble and illustrious features; bending down their bodies modestly,
784. Correcting every careless or unseemly gesture, thus they showed their reverence to him silently; those who with anxious heart, seeking release, were moved by love, with feelings composed bowed down the more.
785. Great men and women, in their several engagements, at the same time arrested on their way, paid to his person and his presence homage: and following him as they gazed, they went not back.
786. For the white circle between his eyebrows adorning his wide and violet colour’d eyes, his noble body bright as gold, his pure and web-joined fingers, 787. All these, though he were but a hermit, were marks of one who was a holy king;
and now the men and women of Râgagriha, the old and young alike, were moved, 788. (And cried), ’This man so noble as a recluse, what common joy is this for us.’
At this time Bimbasâra Râga, placed upon a high tower of observation, 789. Seeing all those men and women, in different ways exhibiting one mark of surprise, calling before him some man outside, enquired at once the cause of it; 790. This one bending his knee below the tower, told fully what he had seen and heard, ’That one of the Sâkya race, renowned of old, a prince most excellent and wonderful, 791. ’Divinely wise, beyond the way of this world, a fitting king to rule the eight regions, now without home, is here, and all men are paying homage to him.’
792. The king on hearing this was deeply moved at heart, and though his body was restrained, his soul had gone. Calling his ministers speedily before him, and all his nobles and attendants, 793. He bade them follow secretly the (prince’s) steps, to observe what charity was given.
(So in obedience to the command) they followed and watched him steadfastly, as with even gait and unmoved presence 794. He entered on the town and begged his food, according to the rule of all great hermits,
with joyful mien and undisturbed mind, not anxious whether much or little alms were given; 795. Whatever he received, costly or poor, he placed within his bowl, then turned back to the wood, and having eaten it and drank of the flowing stream, he joyous sat upon the immaculate mountain.
796. (There he beheld) the green trees fringing with their shade the crags, the scented flowers growing between the intervals, whilst the peacocks and the other birds, joyously flying, mingled their notes;
797. His sacred garments bright and lustrous, (shone) as the sun-lit mulberry leaves; the messengers beholding his fixed composure, one by one (returning), reported what they had seen;
798. The king hearing it, was moved at heart, and forthwith ordered his royal equipment to be brought, his god-like crown and his flower-bespangled robes; then, as the lion-king, he strided forth,
799. And choosing certain aged persons of consideration, learned men, able calmly and wisely to discriminate, he (with them) led the way followed by a hundred thousand people, who like a cloud ascended with the king the royal mountain.
800. And now beholding the dignity of Bodhisattva, every outward gesture (spring of action) under government, sitting with ease upon the mountain crag, as the moon shining limpid in the pure heavens, 801. So (was) his matchless beauty and purity of grace; then as the converting presence of religion
dwelling within the heart makes it reverential, so (beholding him) he reverently approached, 802. Even as divine Sâkara comes to the presence of Mo-hi-su-ma,
so with every outward form of courtesy and reverence (the king approached) and asked him respectfully of his welfare. 803. Bodhisattva, answering as he was moved, in his turn made similar enquiries.
Then the king, the questioning over, sat down with dignity upon a clean-faced rock. 804. And so he steadfastly beheld the divine appearance (of the prince),
the sweetness and complacency of his features revealing what his station was and high estate, his family renown, received by inheritance, 805. The king who for a time restrained his feelings, now wishful to get rid of doubts,
(enquired) (why one) descended from the royal family of the sun-brightness having attended to religious sacrifices thro’ ten thousand generations, 806. Whereof the virtue had descended as his full inheritance, increasing and accumulating until now, (why he) so excellent in wisdom, so young in years, had now become a recluse,
807. Rejecting the position of a Kakravartin’s son, begging his food, despising family fame, his beauteous form, fit for perfumes and anointings, why clothed with coarse Kasâya garments; 808. The hand which ought to grasp the reins of empire, instead thereof, taking its little stint of food; if indeed (the king continued) you were not of royal descent, and would receive as an offering the transfer of this land, 809. Then would I divide with you my empire;
saying this, he scarcely hoped to excite his feelings, who had left his home and family, to be a hermit. Then forthwith the king proceeded thus: 810. ’Give just weight I pray you to my truthful words, desire for power is kin to nobleness,
and so is just pride of fame or family or wealth or personal appearance; 811. ’No longer having any wish to subdue the proud, or to bend (others) down and so get thanks from men, it were better, then, to give to the strong and warlike martial arms to wear, for them to follow war and by their power to get supremacy;
812. ’But when by one’s own power a kingdom falls to hand, who would not then accept the reins of empire? The wise man knows the time to take religion, wealth, and worldly pleasure.
813. ’But if he obtains not the three (or, threefold profit), then in the end he abates his earnest efforts, and reverencing religion, he lets go material wealth. Wealth is the one desire of worldly men;
814. ’To be rich and lose all desire for religion, this is to gain but outside wealth. But to be poor and even thus despise religion, what pleasure can indulgence give in such a case!
815. ’But when possessed of all the three, and when enjoyed with reason and propriety, then religion, wealth, and pleasure make what is rightly called a great master; 816. ’Permit not, then, your perfectly-endowed body to lay aside (sacrifice) its glory, without reward (merit); Mandha(ri) the Kakravartin, as a monarch, ruled the four empires of the world, 817. ’And shared with Sakra his royal throne, but was unequal to the task of ruling heaven. But you, with your redoubtable strength, may well grasp both heavenly and human power;
818. ’I do not rely upon my kingly power, in my desire to keep you here by force, but seeing you change your comeliness of person, and wearing the hermit’s garb,
819. ’Whilst it makes me reverence you for your virtue, moves me with pity and regret for you as a man; you now go begging your food, and I offer you (desire to offer) the whole land as yours;
820. ’Whilst you are young and lusty enjoy yourself. During middle life acquire wealth, and when old and all your abilities ripened, then is the time for following the rules of religion;
821. ’When young to encourage religious fervour, is to destroy the sources of desire; but when old and the breath (of desire) is less eager, then is the time to seek religious solitude; 822. ’When old we should avoid, as a shame, desire of wealth, but get honour in the world by a religious life;
but when young, and the heart light and elastic, then is the time to partake of pleasure, 823. ’In boon companionship to indulge in gaiety, and partake to the full of mutual intercourse;
but as-years creep on, giving up indulgence, to observe the ordinances of religion, 824. ’To mortify the five desires, and go on increasing a joyful and religious heart,
----------
is not this the law of the eminent kings of old, who as a great company paid worship to heaven, 825. ’And borne on the dragon’s back, received the joys of celestial abodes?
All these divine and victorious monarchs, glorious in person, richly adorned, 826. ’Thus having as a company performed their religious offering, in the end received the reward of their conduct in heaven.’
Thus Bimbasâra Râga (used) every kind of winning expedient in argument; The royal prince unmoved and fixed remained firm as Mount Sumeru.
----------
VARGA 11. THE REPLY TO BIMBASÂRA RÂGA.
827. Bimbasâra Râga having, in a decorous manner, and with soothing speech, made his request, the prince on his part respectfully replied, in the following words, deep and heart-stirring:
828. ’Illustrious and world renowned! Your words are not opposed to reason, descendant of a distinguished family--an Aryan--amongst men a true friend indeed, 829. ’Righteous and sincere to the bottom of your heart, it is proper for religion’s sake to speak thus.
In all the world, in its different sections, there is no chartered place for solid virtue (right principles), 830. ’For if virtue flags and folly rules, what reverence can there be,
or honour paid, to a high name or boast of prowess, inherited from former generations! 831. ’And so there may be in the midst of great distress, large goodness, these are not mutually opposed. This then is so with the world in the connection of true worth and friendship.
832. ’A true friend who makes good (free) use of wealth--is rightly called a fast and firm treasure, but he who guards and stints the profit he has made, his wealth will soon be spent and lost;
833. ’The wealth of a country is no constant treasure, but that which is given in charity is rich in returns, therefore charity is a true friend, altho’ it scatters, yet it brings no repentance; 834. ’You indeed are known as liberal and kind, I make no reply in opposition to you, but simply as we meet, so with agreeable purpose we talk.
835. ’I fear birth, old age, disease, and death, and so I seek to find a sure mode of deliverance; I have put away thought of relatives and family affection, how is it possible then for me to return to the world (five desires)
836. ’And not to fear to revive the poisonous snake, (and after) the hail to be burned in the fierce fire; indeed I fear the objects of these several desires, this whirling in the stream (of life) troubles my heart,
837. ’These five desires, the inconstant thieves--stealing from men their choicest treasures, making them unreal, false, and fickle--are like the man called up as an apparition; 838. ’For a time the beholders are affected (by it), but it has no lasting hold upon the mind;
so these five desires are the great obstacles, for ever disarranging the way of peace; 839. ’If the joys of heaven are not worth having,
how much less the desires common to men, begetting the thirst of wild love, and then lost in the enjoyment, 840. ’As the fierce wind fans the fire, till the fuel be spent and the fire expires; of all unrighteous things in the world, there is nothing worse than the domain of the five desires; 841. ’For all men maddened by the power of lust, giving themselves to pleasure, are dead to reason. The wise man fears these desires, he fears to fall. into the way of unrighteousness;
842. ’For like a king who rules all within the four seas, yet still seeks beyond for something more, (so is lust); like the unbounded ocean, it knows not when and where to stop.
843. ’Mandha, the Kakravartin, when the heavens rained yellow gold, and he ruled all within the seas, yet sighed after the domain of the thirty-three heavens; 844. ’Dividing with Sakra his seat, and so thro’ the power of this lust he died;
Nung-Sha (Nyâsa?), whilst practising austerities, got power to rule the thirty-three heavenly abodes, 845. ’But from lust he became proud and supercilious, the Rishi whilst stepping into his chariot, through carelessness in his gait, fell down into the midst of the serpent pit.
846. ’Yen-lo (Yama?) the universal monarch (Kakravartin) wandering abroad thro’ the Trayastrimsas heaven, took a heavenly woman (Apsara) for a queen, and unjustly extorted the gold of a Rishi; 847. ’The Rishi, in anger, added a charm, by which the country was ruined, and his life ended.
Po-lo, and Sakra king of Devas, Sakra king of Devas, and Nung-sha (Nyâsa), 848. ’Nung-sha returning (or, restoring) to Sakra; what certainty (constancy) is there, even for the lord of heaven? Neither is any country safe, though kept by the mighty strength of those dwelling in it.
849. ’But when one’s clothing consists of grass, the berries one’s food, the rivulets one’s drink, with long hair flowing to the ground, silent as a Muni, seeking nothing,
850. ’In this way practising austerities, in the end lust shall be destroyed. Know then, that the province (indulgence) of the five desires is avowedly an enemy of the religious man.
851. ’Even the one-thousand-armed invincible king, strong in his might, finds it hard to conquer this. The Rishi Râma perished because of lust,
852. ’How much more ought I, the son of a Kshatriya, to restrain lustful desire; but indulge in lust a little, and like the child it grows apace, 853. ’The wise man hates it therefore; who would take poison for food?
every sorrow is increased and cherished by the offices of lust. 854. ’If there is no lustful desire, the risings of sorrow are not produced, the wise man seeing the bitterness of sorrow, stamps out and destroys the risings of desire;
855. ’That which the world calls virtue, is but another form of this baneful law; worldly men enjoying the pleasure of covetous desire then every form of careless conduct results; 856. ’These careless ways producing hurt, at death, the subject of them reaps perdition (falls into one of the evil ways).
But by the diligent use of means, and careful continuance therein, 857. The consequences of negligence are avoided, we should therefore dread the non-use of means; recollecting that all things are illusory, the wise man covets them not;
858. ’He who desires such things, desires sorrow, and then goes on again ensnared in love, with no certainty of ultimate freedom; he advances still and ever adds grief to grief, 859. Like one holding a lighted torch burns his hand, and therefore the wise man enters on no such things.
The foolish man and the one who doubts, still encouraging the covetous and burning heart, 860. ’In the end receives accumulated sorrow, not to be remedied by any prospect of rest; covetousness and anger are as the serpent’s poison; the wise man casts away
861. ’The approach of sorrow as a rotten bone; he tastes it not nor touches it, lest it should corrupt his teeth, that which the wise man will not take,
862. ’The king will go through fire and water to obtain, the wicked sons labour for wealth as for a piece of putrid flesh, o’er which the hungry flocks of birds contend. 863. ’So should we regard riches; the wise man is ill pleased at having wealth stored up,
the mind wild with anxious thoughts, 864. ’Guarding himself by night and day, as .a man who fears some powerful enemy,
like as a man’s feelings revolt with disgust at the (sights seen) beneath the slaughter post of the East Market, 865. ’So the high post which marks the presence of lust, and anger, and ignorance, the wise man always avoids;
as those who enter the mountains or the seas have much to contend with and little rest, 866. ’As the fruit which grows on a high tree, and is grasped at by the covetous at the risk of life, so is the region (matter) of covetous desire, tho’ they see the difficulty of getting it, 867. ’Yet how painfully do men scheme after wealth, difficult to acquire, easy to dissipate, as that which is got in a dream, how can the wise man hoard up (such trash)! 868. ’Like covering over with a false surface a hole full of fire, slipping thro’ which the body is burnt, so is the fire of covetous desire. The wise man meddles not with it.
869. ’Like that Kaurava [Kau-to-po], or Pih-se-ni Nanda, or Ni-k’he-lai Danta, as some kandala’s (butcher’s) appearance, 870. ’Such also is the appearance of lustful desire; the wise man will have nothing to do with it, he would rather throw his body into the water or fire, or cast himself down over a steep precipice. 871. ’Seeking to obtain heavenly pleasures, what is this but to remove the place of sorrow, without profit.
Sün-tau, Po-sun-tau (Sundara and Vasundara), brothers of Asura, 872. ’Lived together in great affection, but on account of lustful desire slew one another, and their name perished; all this then comes from lust;
----------
873. ’It is this which makes a man vile, and lashes and goads him with piercing sorrow; lust debases a man, robs him of all hope, whilst through the long night his body and soul are worn out;
874. ’Like the stag that covets the power of speech and dies, or the winged bird that covets sensual pleasure (the net), or the fish that covets the baited hook, such are the calamities that lust brings;
875. ’Considering what are the requirements of life, none of these possess permanency; we eat to appease the pain of hunger, to do away with thirst we drink,
876. ’We clothe ourselves to keep out the cold and wind, we lie down to rest to get sleep, to procure locomotion we seek a carriage, when we would halt we seek a seat, 877. ’We wash to cleanse ourselves from dirt, all these things are done to avoid inconvenience;
we may gather therefore that these five desires have no permanent character; 878. ’For as a man suffering from fever seeks and asks for some cooling medicine, so covetousness seeks for something to satisfy its longings;
foolish men regard these things as permanent, 879. ’And as the necessary requirements of life, but, in sooth, there is no permanent cessation of sorrow; for by coveting to appease these desires we really increase them, there is no character of permanency therefore about them.
880. ’To be filled and clothed are no lasting pleasures, time passes, and the sorrow recurs; summer is cool during the moon-tide shining; winter comes and cold increases;
881. ’And so through all the eightfold laws of the world they possess no marks of permanence, sorrow and joy cannot agree together, as a person slave-governed loses his renown.
882. ’But religion causes all things to be of service, as a king reigning in his sovereignty; so religion controls sorrow, as one fits on a burthen according to power of endurance. 883. ’Whatever our condition in the world, still sorrows accumulate around us.
----------
Even in the condition of a king, how does pain multiply, though bound to others by love, yet this is a cause of grief; 884. ’Without friends and living alone, what joy can there be in this?
Though a man rules over the four kingdoms, yet only one part can be enjoyed; 885. ’To be concerned in ten thousand matters, what profit is there in this, for we only accumulate anxieties.
Put an end to sorrow, then, by appeasing desire, refrain from busy work, this is rest. 886. ’A king enjoys his sensual pleasures; deprived of kingship there is the joy of rest; in both cases there are pleasures (but of different kinds); why then be a king!
----------
----------
----------
----------
887. ’Make then no plan or crafty expedient, to lead me back to the five desires; what my heart prays for, is some quiet place and freedom (a free road); 888. ’But you desire to entangle me in relationships and duties, and destroy the completion of what I seek;
I am in no fear of a hated house (family hatred), nor do I seek the joys of heaven; 889. ’My heart hankers after no vulgar profit, so I have put away my royal diadem; and contrary to your way of thinking, I prefer, henceforth, no more to rule.
890. ’A hare rescued from the serpent’s mouth, would it go back again to be devoured? holding a torch and burning himself, would not a man let it go?
891. ’A man blind. and recovering his sight, would he again seek to be in darkness? the rich, does he sigh for poverty? the wise, does he long to be ignorant? 892. ’Has the world such men as these? then will I again enjoy my country.
(But) I desire to get rid of birth, old age, and death, with body restrained, to beg my food; 893. ’With appetites moderated, to keep in my retreat; and then to avoid the evil modes of a future life, this is to find peace in two worlds: now then I pray you pity me not.
894. ’Pity, rather, those who rule as kings! their souls ever vacant and athirst, in the present world no repose, hereafter receiving pain as their meed.
895. ’You, who possess a distinguished family name, and the reverence due to a great master, would generously share your dignity with me, your worldly pleasures and amusements; 896. ’I, too, in return, for your sake, beseech you to share my reward with me;
----------
----------
he who indulges in (practises) the threefold kinds of pleasure, this man the world calls "Lord," 897. ’But this is not according to reason either, because these things cannot be retained, but where there is no birth, or life, or death, he who exercises himself in this way, is Lord indeed!
898. ’You say that while young a man should be gay, and when old then religious (a recluse), but I regard the feebleness of age as bringing with it loss of power (to be religious), 899. ’Unlike the firmness and power of youth, the will determined and the heart established;
but death as a robber with a drawn sword follows us all, desiring to catch his prey; 900. ’How then should we wait for old age, ere we bring our mind to a religious life?
Inconstancy is the great hunter, age his bow, disease his arrows, 901. ’In the fields of life and death he hunts for living things as for the deer; when he can get his opportunity, he takes our life; who then would wait for age?
902. ’And what the teachers say and do, with reference to matters connected with life and death, exhorting the young, mature, or middle-aged, all to contrive by any means,
903. ’To prepare vast meetings for sacrifices, this they do indeed of their own ignorance; better far to reverence the true law (religion), and put an end to sacrifice to appease the gods! 904. ’Destroying life to gain religious merit, what love can such a man possess?
even if the reward of such sacrifices were lasting, even for this, slaughter would be unseemly; 905. ’How much more, when the reward is transient! Shall we (in search of this) slay that which lives, in worship?
this is like those who practise wisdom, and the way of religious abstraction, but neglect the rules of moral conduct. 906. ’It ill behoves us then to follow with the world, and attend these sacrificial assemblies,
and seek some present good in killing that which lives; the wise avoid destroying life! 907. ’Much less do they engage in general sacrifices, for the purpose of gaining future reward! the fruit (reward) promised in the three worlds is none of mine to choose for happiness! 908. ’All these are governed by transient, fickle laws, like the wind, or the drop that is blown from the grass;
such things therefore I put away from me, and I seek for true escape. 909. ’I hear there is one O-lo-lam (Arâda Kâlâma) who eloquently (well) discourses on the way of escape, I must go to the place where he dwells, that great Rishi and hermit. 910. ’But in truth, sorrow must be banished; I regret indeed leaving you;
may your country have repose and quiet! safely defended (by you) as (by) the divine Sakra-râga! 911. ’May wisdom be shed abroad as light upon your empire, like the brightness of the meridian sun! may you be exceedingly victorious as lord of the great earth, with a perfect heart ruling over its destiny! 912. ’May you direct and defend its sons! ruling your empire in righteousness!
Water and snow and fire are opposed to one another, but the fire by its influence causes vapour, 913. ’The vapour causes the floating clouds, the floating clouds drop down rain; there are birds in space, who drink the rain, with rainless bodies(?) 914. ’Slaughter and peaceful homes are enemies! those who would have peace hate slaughter, and if those who slaughter are so hateful, then put an end, O king, to those who practise it! 915. ’And bid these find release, as those who drink and yet are parched with thirst.’
Then the king clasping together his hands, with greatest reverence and joyful heart, 916. (Said), ’That which you now seek, may you obtain quickly the fruit thereof; having obtained the perfect fruit, return I pray and graciously receive me!’
917. Bodhisattva, his heart inwardly acquiescing, purposing to accomplish his prayer, departing, pursued his road, going to the place where Arâda Kâlâma dwelt, 918. Whilst the king with all his retinue, their hands clasped, themselves followed a little space, then with thoughtful and mindful heart, returned once more to Râgagriha!
----------
VARGA 12. VISIT TO ARÂDA UDRARÂMA.
919. The child of the glorious sun of the Ikshvâku race, going to that quiet peaceful grove, reverently stood before the Muni, the great Rishi Arâda Râma,
920. The dark-clad (?) followers of the Kalam (Saṅghârâma) seeing afar off Bodhisattva approaching, with loud voice raised a joyful chant, and with suppressed breath muttered ’Welcome,’
921. As with clasped hands they reverenced him. Approaching one another, they made mutual enquiries; and this being done, with the usual apologies, according to their precedence (in age) they sat down;
922. The Brahmakârins observing the prince, (beheld) his personal beauty and carefully considered his appearance; respectfully they satisfied themselves of his high qualities, like those who, thirsty, drink the ’pure dew.’
923. (Then) with raised hands they addressed the prince, ’Have you (or, may we know whether you have) been long an ascetic, divided from your family and broken from the bonds of love, like the elephant who has cast off restraint? 924. ’Full of wisdom (your appearance), completely enlightened, (you seem) well able to escape the poisonous fruit (of this world).
----------
In old time the monarch Ming Shing (brightly victorious) gave up his kingly estate to his son, 925. ’As a man who has carried a flowery wreath, when withered casts it away: but such is not your case, full of youthful vigour, and yet not enamoured with the condition of a holy king;
----------
926. ’We see that your will is strong and fixed, capable of becoming a vessel of the true law, able to embark in the boat of wisdom, and to cross over the sea of life and death:
927. ’The common class, enticed to come to learn, their talents first are tested, then they are taught; but as I understand your case, your mind is already fixed and your will firm: 928. ’And now you have undertaken the purpose of learning, (I am persuaded) you will not in the end shrink from it.’
The prince hearing this exhortation, with gladness made reply: 929. ’You have with equal intention, illustrious! cautioned me with impartial mind; with humble heart I accept the advice, and pray that it may be so with me, (as you anticipate);
930. ’That I may in my night journey obtain a torch, to guide me safely thro’ treacherous places; a handy boat to cross over the sea;--may it be so even now with me!
931. ’But as I am somewhat in doubt and anxious to learn, I will venture to make known my doubts, and ask, with respect to old age, disease, and death, how are these things to be escaped?’
932. At this time O-lo-lam (Arâda Kâlâma) hearing the question asked by the prince, briefly from the various Sûtras and Sâstras, quoted passages in explanation of a way of deliverance.
933. ’But thou (he said) illustrious youth! so highly gifted, and eminent among the wise! hear what I have to say, as I discourse upon the mode of ending birth and death;
934. ’Nature, and change, birth, old age, and death, these five (attributes) belong to all; "nature" is (in itself) pure and without fault; the involution of this with the five elements, 935. ’Causes an awakening and power of perception, which, according to its exercise, is the cause of "change;"
----------
form, sound, order, taste, touch, these are called the five objects of sense (dhâtu); 936. ’As the hand and foot are called the "two ways" (methods of moving?) so these are called "the roots" of action (the five skandhas);
the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, these are named the "roots" (instruments) of understanding. 937. ’The root of "mind" (manas) is twofold, being both material, and also intelligent; "nature" by its involutions is "the cause," the knower of the cause is "I" (the soul);
----------
938. ’Kapila the Rishi and his numerous followers, on this deep principle of "soul," practising wisdom (Buddhi), found deliverance. 939. ’Kapila and now Vâkaspati, by the power of "Buddhi" perceiving the character of birth, old age, and death,
declare that on this is founded true philosophy; 940. ’Whilst all opposed to this, they say, is false.
"Ignorance" and "passion," causing constant "transmigration," 941. ’Abiding in the midst of these (they say) is the lot of "all that lives."
Doubting the truth of "soul" is called "excessive doubt," and without distinguishing aright, there can be no method of escape. 942. ’Deep speculation as to the limits of perception is but to involve the "soul;"
thus unbelief leads to confusion, and ends in differences of thought and conduct. 943. ’Again, the various speculations on "soul" (such as) "I say," "I know and perceive," "I come" and "I go" or "I remain fixed," these are called the intricacies (windings) of "soul"’
944. ’And then the fancies raised in different natures, some saying "this is so," others denying it, and this condition of uncertainty is called the state of "darkness."
945. ’Then there are those who say that outward things (resembling forms) are one with "soul," who say that the "objective" is the same as "mind," who confuse "intelligence" with "instruments," who say that "number" is the "soul."
----------
946. ’Thus not distinguishing aright, these are called "excessive quibbles," "marks of folly," "nature changes," and so on.
947. ’To worship and recite religious books, to slaughter living things in sacrifice, to render pure by fire and water, and thus awake the thought of final rescue, 948. ’All these ways of thinking are called "without right expedient,"
the result of ignorance and doubt, by means of word or thought or deed; 949. ’Involving outward relationships, this is called "depending on means;"
making the material world the ground of "soul," this is called "depending on the senses." 950. ’By these eight sorts of speculation are we involved in birth and death.
The foolish masters of the world make their classifications in these five ways, (viz.) 951. ’Darkness, folly, and great folly, angry passion, with timid fear.
Indolent coldness is called "darkness;" birth and death are called "folly;" 952. ’Lustful desire is "great folly;" because of great men subjected to error, cherishing angry feelings, "passion" results; trepidation of the heart is called "fear."
953. ’Thus these foolish men dilate upon the five desires; but the root of the great sorrow of birth and death, the life destined to be spent in the five ways,
954. ’The cause of the whirl of life, I clearly perceive, is to be placed in the existence of "I;" because of the influence of this cause, result the consequences of repeated birth and death;
955. ’This cause is without any nature of its own, and its fruits have no nature; rightly considering what has been said, there are four matters which have to do with escape, 956. ’Kindling wisdom--opposed to dark ignorance,--making manifest--opposed to concealment and obscurity,--
----------
----------
----------
if these four matters be understood, then we may escape birth, old age, and death. 957. ’Birth, old age, and death being over, then we attain a final place;
the Brahmans all depending on this principle, 958. ’Practising themselves in a pure life, have also largely dilated on it, for the good of the world.’
The prince hearing these words again enquired of Ârâda: 959. ’Tell me what are the expedients you name, and what is the final place to which they lead,
and what is the character of that pure (Brahman) life; and again what are the stated periods 960. ’During which such life must be practised, and during which such life is lawful; all these are principles to be enquired into; and on them I pray you discourse for my sake.’
961. Then that Ârâda, according to the Sûtras and Sâstras, spoke, ’Yourself using wisdom is the expedient; but I will further dilate on this a little;
962. ’First by removing from the crowd and leading a hermit’s life, depending entirely on alms for food, extensively practising rules of decorum, religiously adhering to right rules of conduct,
963. ’Desiring little and knowing when to abstain, receiving whatever is given (in food), whether pleasant or otherwise, delighting to practise a quiet (ascetic) life, diligently studying all the Sûtras and Sâstras,
964. ’Observing the character of covetous longing and fear, without remnant of desire to live in purity, to govern well the organs of life, the mind quieted and silently at rest,
965. ’Removing desire, and hating vice, all the sorrows of life (the world of desire) put away, then there is happiness; and we obtain the enjoyment of the first dhyâna.
966. ’Having obtained this first dhyâna, then with the illumination thus obtained, by inward meditation is born reliance on thought alone, and the entanglements of folly are put away; 967. ’The mind depending on this, then after death, born in the Brahma heavens,
----------
the enlightened are able to know themselves; by the use of means is produced further inward illumination; 968. ’Diligently persevering, seeking higher advance, accomplishing the second dhyâna, tasting of that great joy, we are born in the Kwong-yin heaven (Abhâsvara);
969. ’Then by the use of means putting away this delight, practising the third dhyâna, resting in such delight and wishing no further excellence, there is a birth in the Subhakritsna (hin-tsing) heaven;
970. ’Leaving the thought of such delight, straightway we reach the fourth dhyâna, all joys and sorrows done away, the thought of escape produced,
971. ’We dwell in this fourth dhyâna, and are born in the Vrihat-phala heaven; because of its long enduring years, it is thus called Vrihat-phala (extensive-fruit);
972. ’Whilst in that state of abstraction rising (higher), perceiving there is a place beyond any bodily condition, adding still and persevering further in practising wisdom, rejecting this fourth dhyâna, 973. ’Firmly resolved to persevere in the search, still contriving to put away every desire after form,
gradually from every pore of the body there is perceived a feeling of empty release, 974. ’And in the end this extends to every solid part, so that the whole is perfected in an apprehension of emptiness.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
In brief, perceiving no limits to. this emptiness, there is opened to the view boundless knowledge. 975. ’Endowed with inward rest and peace, the idea of "I" departs, and the object of "I:" clearly discriminating the non-existence of matter (bhava), this is the condition of immaterial life.
976. ’As the Muñga (grass) when freed from its horny case, or as the wild bird which escapes from its prison trap, so, getting away from all material limitations, we thus find perfect release.
977. Thus ascending above the Brahmans (Brahmalokas?), deprived of every vestige of bodily existence, we still endure. Endued with wisdom! let it be known this is real and true deliverance.
978. You ask what are the expedients for obtaining this escape; even as I have before detailed, those who have deep faith will learn.
979. ’The Rishis Gaigîshavya, Ganaka, Vriddha Parâsara, and other searchers after truth, 980. ’All by the way I have explained, have reached true deliverance.’
The prince hearing these words, deeply pondering on the outline of these principles, 981. And reaching back to the influences produced by our former lives, again asked with further words:
’I have heard your very excellent system of wisdom, the principles very subtle and deep-reaching, 982. ’From which I learn that because of not "letting go" (by knowledge as a cause), we do not reach the end of the religious life;
but by understanding nature in its involutions, then, you say, we obtain deliverance; 983. ’I perceive this law of birth has also concealed in it another law as a germ;
you say that the "I" (i.e. "the soul," of Kapila) being rendered pure, forthwith there is true deliverance; 984. ’But if we encounter a union of cause and effect, then there is a return to the trammels of birth;
just as the germ in the seed, when earth, fire, water, and wind 985. ’Seem to have destroyed in it the principle of life, meeting with favourable concomitant circumstances will yet revive,
without any evident cause, but because of desire; so those who have gained this supposed release, (likewise) 986. ’Keeping the idea of "I" and "living things," have in fact gained no final deliverance;
in every condition, letting go the "three classes" and again reaching the three "excellent qualities," 987. ’Because of the eternal existence of soul, by the subtle influences of that,
(influences resulting from the past,) the heart lets go the idea of expedients, 988. ’And obtains an almost endless duration of years. This, you say, is true release;
you say "letting go the ground on which the idea of soul rests," that this frees us from "limited existence," 989. ’And that the mass of people have not yet removed the idea of soul, (and are therefore still in bondage). But what is this letting go "gunas" (cords fettering the soul); if one is fettered by these "gunas," how can there be release?
990. ’For gunî (the object) and "guna" (the quality) in idea are different, but in substance one; if you say that you can remove the properties of a thing (and leave the thing) by arguing it to the end, this is not so. 991. ’If you remove heat from fire, then there is no such thing as fire,
----------
or if you remove surface (front) from body, what body can remain? 992. ’Thus "guna" is as it were surface, remove this and there can be no "gunî." So that this deliverance, spoken of before, must leave a body yet in bonds.
993. ’Again, you say that by "clear knowledge" you get rid of body; there is then such a thing as knowledge or the contrary; if you affirm the existence of clear knowledge, then there should be some one who possesses it (i.e. possesses this knowledge); 994. ’If there be a possessor, how can there be deliverance (from this personal "I")?
If you say there is no "knower," then who is it that is spoken of as "knowing?" 995. ’If there is knowledge and no person, then the subject of knowledge may be a stone or a log;
moreover, to have clear knowledge of these minute causes of contamination and reject them thoroughly, 996. ’These being so rejected, there must be an end, then, of the "doer."
What Arâda has declared cannot satisfy my heart. 997. ’This clear knowledge is not "universal wisdom," I must go on and seek a better explanation.’ Going on then to the place of Udra Rishi, he also expatiated on this question of ’I.’
998. (But) although he refined the matter to the utmost, laying down a term of ’thought’ and ’no thought’ taking the position of removing ’thought’ and ’no thought,’ yet even so he came not out of the mire;
999. For supposing creatures attained that state, still (he said) there is a possibility of returning to the coil, whilst Bodhisattva sought a method of getting out of it. So once more leaving Udra Rishi,
1000. He went on in search of a better system, and came at last to Mount Kia-ke [the forest of mortification], where was a town called Pain-suffering forest (Uravilva?). Here the five Bhikshus had gone before.
1001. When then he beheld these five, virtuously keeping in check their senses (passion-members), holding to the rules of moral conduct, practising mortification, dwelling in that grove of mortification;
----------
----------
1002. Occupying a spot beside the Nairañgana river, perfectly composed and filled with contentment, Bodhisattva forthwith by them (selecting) one spot, quietly gave himself to thought.
----------
1003. The five Bhikshus knowing him with earnest heart to be seeking escape, offered him their services with devotion, as if reverencing Îsvara Deva.
1004. Having finished their attentions and dutiful services, then going on he took his seat not far off, as one about to enter on a course of religious practice, composing all his members as he desired.
1005. Bodhisattva diligently applied himself to ’means,’ as one about to cross over old age, disease, and death. With full purpose of heart (he set himself) to endure mortification, to restrain every bodily passion, and give up thought about sustenance,
1006. With purity of heart to observe the fast-rules, which no worldly man (active man) can bear; silent and still, lost in thoughtful meditation; and so for six years he continued,
1007. Each day eating one hemp grain, his bodily form shrunken and attenuated, seeking how to cross (the sea) of birth and death, exercising himself still deeper and advancing further;
1008. Making his way perfect by the disentanglements of true wisdom, not eating, and yet not (looking to that as) a cause (of emancipation), his four members although exceedingly weak, his heart of wisdom increasing yet more and more in light;
1009. His spirit free, his body light and refined, his name spreading far and wide, as ’highly gifted,’ even as the moon when first produced, or as the Kumuda flower spreading out its sweetness; 1010. Everywhere thro’ the country his excellent fame extended; the daughters of the lord of the place both coming to see him,
his mortified body like a withered branch, just completing the period of six years, 1011. Fearing the sorrow of birth and death, seeking earnestly the method (cause) of true wisdom,
he came to the conviction that these were not the means to extinguish desire and produce ecstatic contemplation; 1012. Nor yet (the means by which) in former time, seated underneath the Gambu tree, he arrived at that miraculous condition, that surely was the proper way, (he thought),
1013. The way opposed to this of ’withered body.’ I should therefore rather seek strength of body, by drink and food refresh my members, and with contentment cause my mind to rest.
1014. My mind at rest, I shall enjoy silent composure; composure is the trap for getting ecstasy (dhyâna); whilst in ecstasy perceiving the true law (right law, i.e. truth), then the force of truth (the law) obtained, disentanglement will follow.
1015. And thus composed, enjoying perfect quiet, old age and death are put away; and then defilement is escaped by this first means; thus then by equal steps the excellent law results from life restored by food and drink.
----------
----------
----------
----------
1016. Having carefully considered this principle, bathing in the Nairañgana river, he desired afterwards to leave the water (pool), but owing to extreme exhaustion was unable to rise; 1017. Then a heavenly spirit holding out (pressing down) a branch, taking this in his hand he (raised himself and) came forth.
At this time on the opposite side of the grove there was a certain chief herdsman, 1018. Whose eldest daughter was called Nandâ. One of the Suddhavâsa Devas addressing her said, ’Bodhisattva dwells in the grove, go you then, and present to him a religious offering.’
1019. Nandâ Balada (or Balaga or Baladhya) with joy came to the spot, above her hands (i.e. on her wrists) white chalcedony bracelets, her clothing of a grey (bluish) colour (dye); 1020. The grey and the white together contrasted in the light, as the colours of the rounded river bubble;
with simple heart and quicken’d step she came, and, bowing down at Bodhisattva’s feet, 1021. She reverently offered him perfumed rice milk, begging him of his condescension to accept it.
Bodhisattva taking it, partook of it (at once), whilst she received, even then, the fruits of her religious act. 1022. Having eaten it, all his members refreshed, he became capable of receiving Bodhi;
his body and limbs glistening with (renewed strength), and his energies swelling higher still, 1023. As the hundred streams swell the sea, or the first quarter’d moon daily increases in brightness.
The five Bhikshus having witnessed this, perturbed, were filled with suspicious reflection; 1024. They supposed (said) that his religious zeal (heart) was flagging, and that he was leaving and looking for a better abode, as though he had obtained deliverance, the five elements entirely removed.
1025. Bodhisattva wandered on alone, directing his course to that ’fortunate’ tree, beneath whose shade he might accomplish his search after complete enlightenment. 1026. (Over) the ground wide and level, producing soft and pliant grass,
easily he advanced with lion step, pace by pace, (whilst) the earth shook withal; 1027. And as it shook, Kâla nâga aroused, was filled with joy, as his eyes were opened to the light.
Forthwith he exclaimed: ’When formerly I saw the Buddhas of old, there was the sign of an earthquake as now; 1028. ’The virtues of a Muni are so great in majesty, that the great earth cannot endure them; as step by step his foot treads upon the ground, so is there heard the sound of the rumbling earth-shaking; 1029. ’A brilliant light now illumes the world, as the shining of the rising sun;
five hundred bluish tinted birds (I see), wheeling round to the right, flying through space; 1030. ’A gentle, soft, and cooling breeze blows around in an agreeable way;
all these auspicious (miraculous) signs are the same as those of former Buddhas; 1031. ’Wherefore I know that this Bodhisattva will certainly arrive at perfect wisdom. And now, behold! from yonder man, a grass cutter, he obtains some pure and pliant grass, 1032. ’Which spreading out beneath the tree, with upright body, there he takes his seat; his feet placed under him, not carelessly arranged (moving to and fro), but like the firmly fixed and compact body of a Nâga;
1033. ’Nor shall he rise again from off his seat till he has completed his undertaking.’ And so he (the Nâga) uttered these words by way of confirmation. The heavenly Nâgas, filled with joy,
1034. (Caused a) cool refreshing breeze to rise; the trees and grass were yet unmoved by it, and all the beasts, quiet and silent, (looked on in wonderment.) 1035. These are the signs that Bodhisattva will certainly attain enlightenment.
----------
VARGA 13. DEFEATS MÂRA.
1036. The great Rishi, of the royal tribe of Rishis, beneath the Bodhi tree firmly established, resolved by oath to perfect the way of complete deliverance. 1037. The spirits, Nâgas, and the heavenly multitude, all were filled with joy; but Mâra Devarâga, enemy of religion, alone was grieved, and rejoiced not;
1038. Lord of the five desires, skilled in all the arts of warfare, the foe of those who seek deliverance, therefore his name is rightly given Pisuna.
1039. Now this Mâra râga had three daughters, mincingly beautiful and of a pleasant countenance, in every way fit by artful ways to enflame a man with love, highest in this respect among the Devîs. 1040. The first was named Yuh-yen (lust-pollution), the second Neng-yueh-gin (able to delight a man), the third Ngai-loh (love joy). These three, at this time, advanced together, 1041. And addressed their father Pisuna and said: ’May we not know the trouble that afflicts you?’
The father calming his feelings, addressed his daughters thus: 1042. ’The world has now a great Muni, he has taken a strong oath as a helmet, he holds a mighty bow in his hand, wisdom is the diamond shaft he uses,
1043. ’His object is to get the mastery in the world, to ruin and destroy my territory (domain); I am myself unequal to him, for all men will believe in him, 1044. ’And all find refuge in the way of his salvation; then will my land be desert and unoccupied.
But as when a man transgresses the laws of morality, his body (or, he himself) is then empty (i.e. unprotected), 1045. ’So now, the eye of wisdom, not yet opened (in this man), whilst my empire still has peace (quiet), I will go and overturn his purpose, and break down and divide the ridge-pole (of his house).’
1046. Seizing then his bow and his five arrows, with all his retinue of male and female attendants, he went to that grove of ’fortunate rest’ with the vow that the world (all flesh) should not find peace.
1047. Then seeing the Muni, quiet and still (silent), preparing to cross the sea of the three worlds, in his left hand grasping his bow, with his right hand pointing his arrow,
1048. He addressed Bodhisattva and said: ’Kshatriya! rise up quickly! for you may well fear! your death is at hand; you may practise your own religious system,
1049. ’But let go this effort after the law of deliverance (for others); wage warfare in the field of charity as a cause of merit, appease the tumultuous world, and so in the end reach your reward in heaven; 1050. ’This is a way renowned and well established, in which former saints (victors) have walked, Rishis and kings and men of eminence; but this system of penury and alms-begging is unworthy of you.
1051. ’Now then if you rise not, you had best consider with yourself, that if you give not up your vow, and tempt me to let fly an arrow,
1052. ’How that Aila, grandchild of Soma, by one of these arrows just touched, as by a fanning of the wind, lost his reason and became a madman;
1053. ’And how the Rishi Vimala, practising austerities, hearing the sound of one of these darts, his heart possessed by great fear, bewildered and darkened he lost his true nature;
1054. ’How much less can you--a late-born one--hope to escape this dart of mine. Quickly arise then! if hardly you may get away!
1055. ’This arrow full of rankling poison, fearfully insidious where it strikes a foe! See now! with all my force, I point it! and are you resting in the face of such calamity? 1056. ’How is it that you fear not this dread arrow? say! why do you not tremble?’
Mâra uttered such fear-inspiring threats, bent on overawing Bodhisattva. 1057. But Bodhisattva’s heart remained unmoved; no doubt, no fear was present.
Then Mâra instantly discharged his arrow, whilst the three women came in front; 1058. Bodhisattva regarded not the arrow, nor considered ought the women three. Mâra râga now was troubled much with doubt, and muttered thus ’twixt heart and mouth: 1059. ’Long since the maiden of the snowy mountains, shooting at Mahesvara, constrained him to change his mind; and yet Bodhisattva is unmoved,
1060. ’And heeds not even this dart of mine, nor the three heavenly women! nought prevails to move his heart or raise one spark of love within him. 1061. ’Now must I assemble my army-host, and press him sore by force;’ having thought thus awhile, Mâra’s army suddenly assembled round; 1062. Each (severally) assumed his own peculiar form; some were holding spears, others grasping swords, others snatching up trees, others wielding diamond maces; (thus were they) armed with every sort of weapon;
1063. Some had heads like hogs, others like fishes, others like asses, others like horses; some with forms like snakes or like the ox or savage tiger; lion-headed, dragon-headed, (and like) every other kind of beast;
1064. Some had many heads on one body-trunk, with faces having but a single eye, and then again with many eyes; some with great-bellied mighty bodies,
1065. And others thin and skinny, bellyless; others long-legged, mighty-knee’d; others big-shanked and fat-calved; some with long and claw-like nails;
1066. Some were headless, breastless, faceless; some with two feet and many bodies; some with big faces looking every way; some pale and ashy-coloured,
1067. Others colour’d like the bright star rising, others steaming fiery vapour, some with ears like elephants, with humps like mountains, some with naked forms covered with hair,
1068. Some with leather skins for clothing, their faces party-coloured, crimson and white; some with tiger skins as robes, some with snake skins over them, 1069. Some with tinkling bells around their waists, others with twisted screw-like hair, others with hair dishevelled covering the body, some breath-suckers,
1070. Others body-snatchers, some dancing and shrieking awhile, some jumping onwards with their feet together, some striking one another as they went,
1071. Others waving (wheeling round) in the air, others flying and leaping between the trees, others howling, or hooting, or screaming, or whining, with their evil noises shaking the great earth;
1072. Thus this wicked goblin troop encircled on its four sides the Bodhi tree; some bent on tearing his body to pieces, others on devouring it whole;
1073. From the four sides flames belched forth, and fiery steam ascended up to heaven; tempestuous winds arose on every side; the mountain forests shook and quaked;
1074. Wind, fire, and steam, with dust combined, (produced) a pitchy darkness, rendering all invisible. And now the Devas well affected to the law, and all the Nâgas and the spirits (kwei-shin), 1075. All incensed at this host of Mâra, with anger fired, wept tears of blood;
----------
the great company of Suddhavâsa gods, beholding Mâra tempting Bodhisattva, 1076. Free from low-feeling, with hearts undisturbed by passion, moved by pity towards him and commiseration,
came in a body to behold the Bodhisattva, so calmly seated and so undisturbed, 1077. Surrounded with an uncounted host of devils, shaking the heaven and earth with sounds ill-omened.
Bodhisattva silent and quiet in the midst remained, his countenance as bright as heretofore, unchanged; 1078. Like the great lion-king placed amongst all the beasts howling and growling round him (so he sat),
a sight unseen before, so strange and wonderful! 1079. The host of Mâra hastening, as arranged, each one exerting his utmost force,
taking each other’s place in turns, threatening every moment to destroy him, 1080. Fiercely staring, grinning with their teeth, flying tumultuously, bounding here and there;
but Bodhisattva, silently beholding them, (watched them) as one would watch the games of children; 1081. And now the demon host waxed fiercer and more angry, and added force to force,
----------
in further conflict; grasping at stones they could not lift, or lifting them, they could not let them go; 1082. Their flying spears, lances, and javelins, stuck fast in space, refusing to descend;
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
the angry thunder-drops and mighty hail, with these, were changed into five-colour’d lotus flowers, 1083. Whilst the foul poison of the dragon snakes was turned to spicy-breathing air.
----------
----------
Thus all these countless sorts of creatures, wishing to destroy the Bodhisattva, 1084. Unable to remove him from the spot, were with their own weapons wounded.
Now Mâra had an aunt-attendant whose name was Ma-kia-ka-li (Mâha Kâlî?), 1085. Who held a skull-dish in her hands, and stood in front of Bodhisattva, and with every kind of winsome gesture, tempted to lust the Bodhisattva.
1086. So all these followers of Mâra, possessed of every demon-body form, united in discordant uproar, hoping to terrify Bodhisattva; 1087. But not a hair of his was moved, and Mâra’s host was filled with sorrow.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
Then in the air the crowd of angels (spirits), their forms invisible, raised their voices, saying: 1088. ’Behold the great Muni; his mind unmoved by any feeling of resentment, whilst all that wicked Mâra race, besotted, are vainly bent on his destruction;
1089. ’Let go your foul and murderous thoughts against that silent Muni, calmly seated! You cannot with a breath move the Sumeru mountain;
1090. ’Fire may freeze, water may burn, the roughened earth may grow soft and pliant, but ye cannot hurt the Bodhisattva! Thro’ ages past disciplined by suffering,
1091. Bodhisattva rightly trained in thought, ever advancing in the use of "means," pure and illustrious for wisdom, loving and merciful to all, 1092. ’These four conspicuous (excellent) virtues cannot with him be rent asunder, so as to make it hard or doubtful whether he gain the highest wisdom. 1093. ’For as the thousand rays of yonder sun must drown the darkness of the world,
or as the boring wood must kindle fire, or as the earth deep-dug gives water, 1094. ’So he who perseveres in the "right means," by seeking thus, will find.
The world without instruction, poisoned by lust and hate and ignorance, 1095. ’Because he pitied "flesh," so circumstanced, he sought on their account the joy of wisdom. Why then would you molest and hinder one who seeks to banish sorrow from the world?
1096. ’The ignorance that everywhere prevails is due to false pernicious books (sûtras), and therefore Bodhisattva, walking uprightly, would lead and draw men after him. 1097. ’To obscure and blind the great world-leader, this undertaking is impossible, for ’tis as though in the Great Desert a man would purposely mislead the merchant-guide;
1098. ’So "all flesh" having fallen into darkness, ignorant of where they are going, for their sakes he would light the lamp of wisdom; say then! why would you extinguish it?
1099. ’All flesh engulphed and overwhelmed in the great sea of birth and death, this one prepares the boat of wisdom; say then! why destroy and sink it?
1100. ’Patience is the sprouting of religion, firmness its root, good conduct is the flower, the enlightened heart the boughs and branches, 1101. ’Wisdom supreme the entire tree, the "transcendent law" the fruit, its shade protects all living things; say then! why would you cut it down?
1102. ’Lust, hate, and ignorance, (these are) the rack and bolt, the yoke placed on the shoulder of the world; through ages long he has practised austerities to rescue men from these their fetters, 1103. ’He now shall certainly attain his end, sitting on this right-established throne;
----------
(seated) as all the previous Buddhas, firm and compact like a diamond; 1104. ’Though all the earth were moved and shaken, yet would this place be fixed and stable; him, thus fixed and well assured, think not that you can overturn.
1105. ’Bring down and moderate your mind’s desire, banish these high and envious thoughts, prepare yourselves for right reflection, be patient in your services.’
1106. Mâra hearing these sounds in space, and seeing Bodhisattva still unmoved, filled with fear and banishing his high and supercilious thoughts, again took up his way to heaven above;
1107. Whilst all his host (were scattered), o’erwhelmed with grief and disappointment, fallen from their high estate, ’reft of their warrior pride, their warlike weapons and accoutrements thrown heedlessly and cast away ’mid woods and deserts. 1108. Like as when some cruel chieftain slain, the hateful band is all dispersed and scattered,
so the host of Mâra disconcerted, fled away. The mind of Bodhisattva (now reposed) peaceful and quiet. 1109. The morning sun-beams brighten with the dawn, the dust-like mist dispersing, disappears;
the moon and stars pale their faint light, the barriers of the night are all removed, 1110. Whilst from above a fall of heavenly flowers pay their sweet tribute to the Bodhisattva.
No Chinese
VARGA 14. O-WEI-SAN-POU-TI (ABHISAMBODHI).
1111. Bodhisattva having subdued Mâra, his firmly fixed mind at rest, thoroughly exhausting the first principle of truth, he entered into deep and subtle contemplation,
1112. Self-contained. Every kind of Sâmadhi in order passed before his eyes. During the first watch he entered on ’right perception,’ and in recollection all former births passed before his eyes;
1113. Born in such a place, of such a name, and downwards to his present birth, so through hundreds, thousands, myriads, all his births and deaths he knew;
1114. Countless in number were they, of every kind and sort; then knowing, too, his family relationships, great pity rose within his heart.
1115. This sense of deep compassion passed, he once again considered ’all that lives,’ and how they moved within the six portions of life’s revolution, no final term to birth and death;
1116. Hollow all, and false and transient (unfixed) as the plantain tree, or as a dream, or phantasy. Then in the middle watch of night, he reached to knowledge (eyes) of the pure Devas,
1117. And beheld before him every creature, as one sees images upon a mirror;
all creatures born and born again to die, noble and mean, the poor and rich,
1118. Reaping the fruit of right or evil doing, and sharing happiness or misery in consequence.
First he considered and distinguished evil-doers (works), that such must ever reap an evil birth; 1119. Then he considered those who practise righteous deeds, that these must gain a place with men or gods;
but those again born in the nether hells, (he saw) participating in every kind of misery;
1120. Swallowing (drinking) molten brass (metal), the iron skewers piercing their bodies,
confined within the boiling caldron, driven and made to enter the fiery oven (dwelling),
1121. Food for hungry, long-toothed dogs, or preyed upon by brain-devouring birds;
dismayed by fire, then (they wander through) thick woods, with leaves like razors gashing their limbs,
1122. While knives divide their (writhing) bodies, or hatchets lop their members, bit by bit;
drinking the bitterest poisons, their fate yet holds them back from death. 1123. Thus those who found their joy in evil deeds, he saw receiving now their direst sorrow;
a momentary taste of pleasure here, a dreary length of suffering there; 1124. A laugh or joke because of others’ pain, a crying out and weeping now at punishment received.
Surely if living creatures saw the consequence of all their evils deeds, self-visited, 1125. With hatred would they turn and leave them, fearing the ruin following--the blood and death.
He saw, moreover, all the fruits of birth as beasts, each deed entailing its own return, 1126. (And) when death ensues born in some other form (beast shape), different in kind according to the deeds.
----------
Some doomed to die for the sake of skin or flesh, some for their horns or hair or bones or wings, 1127. Others torn or killed in mutual conflict, friend or relative before, contending thus;
----------
(some) burthened with loads or dragging heavy weights, (others) pierced and urged on by pricking goads, 1128. Blood flowing down their tortured forms, parched and hungry--no relief afforded;
----------
----------
then, turning round, (he saw) one with the other struggling, possessed of no independent strength; 1129. Flying through air or sunk in deep water, yet no place as a refuge left from death.
He saw, moreover, those, misers and covetous, born now as hungry ghosts, 1130. Vast bodies like the towering mountain, with mouths as small as any needle-tube, hungry and thirsty, nought but fire and poison’d flame to enwrap their burning forms within.
1131. Covetous, they would not give to those who sought, or duped the man who gave in charity, now born among the famished ghosts, they seek for food, but cannot find withal. 1132. The refuse of the unclean man they fain would eat,
but this is changed and lost (before it can be eaten); oh! if a man believes that covetousness is thus repaid, as in their case, 1133. Would he not give his very flesh in charity even as Sivi râga did!
Then, once more (he saw), those reborn as men, with bodies like some foul sewer, 1134. Ever moving ’midst the direst sufferings, born from the womb to fear and trembling, with body tender, touching anything its feelings painful, as if cut with knives;
1135. Whilst born in this condition, no moment free from chance of death, labour, and sorrow, yet seeking birth again, and being born again, enduring pain.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------